Studying the effects of digital arts-based interventions on teenagers’ social 
media usage, brain connectivity, and mental health: study protocol of the 
SMART project
Lucía Vaquero a,b,c,d,e, Karleigh Groves a,b,c,f, Eva Luna Muñoz-Vidal a,b,c,g, Kevin Jamesh, J. L. Marlorh, 
Christopher McIntyreh, Lorena Ostiai, Sean Sirotai, Lindsay Shieldsj,k, Franziska Degé l, 
Elisa García-Mingo dand Pablo Ripollés a,b,c
aDepartment of Psychology, New York University, New York, USA; bMusic and Audio Research Laboratory (MARL), New York University, 
New York, USA; cCenter for Language, Music, and Emotion (CLaME), New York University, New York, USA; dResearch Group in Digital 
Culture and Social Movements, Faculty of Political and Social Science, Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain; eDepartment of 
Experimental Psychology, Cognitive Processes and Speech Therapy, Faculty of Psychology, Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, 
Spain; fDepartment of Psychology, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA; gRehabilitation Sciences Program, Steinhardt School of Culture, 
Education, and Human Development, New York University, New York, USA; hAmerican Composers Orchestra, New York City, USA; 
iFreelance Teaching Artist / Visual Artist; jFort Hamilton High School, Brooklyn, USA; kEducational Theatre Association, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 
lDepartment of Music, Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Frankfurt, Germany
ABSTRACT
Background: Social media (SM) has become ubiquitous among youth. However, which SM 
activities are beneficial or detrimental for the wellness of children and adolescents is still 
under debate. While some reports highlight positive outcomes of SM in learning, social 
interaction, and wellbeing, other investigations suggest that the overuse of SM induces 
decreased attention, cognitive, and emotional control, and increases mental-health related 
disorders (e.g. depression and anxiety). Interestingly, the cognitive and emotional functions 
negatively affected by the intense use of SM, as well as some of its neural underpinnings, 
have been previously and consistently reported to benefit from music and arts-based 
interventions.
Objectives: The protocol for the ‘Social Media Artistic tRaining in Teenagers (SMART)’ project 
(ClinicalTrial: NCT06402253) is presented here: digital art-based interventions will be used to 
teach adolescents how to use SM in more goal-oriented and stimulating ways, in the context 
of learning music or photography composition/editing through specific open-source software.
Methods: Participants (aged 13–16) will be evaluated before and after completing a 3-month 
music or photography composition/editing intervention programme. Participants will also 
provide weekly measures of SM usage and mood. A matched passive control group will also 
be recruited, evaluated, and followed for 3 months. Evaluations will include cognitive 
(attention), mood, and mental-health (depression, stress, anxiety, self-esteem) measures, as 
well as functional and structural connectivity and morphological biomarkers obtained via MRI 
and MEG techniques.
Discussion: We expect observable changes in self-reported use and attitudes towards SM, and 
benefits in attention, mood, and mental-health measures, as well as in the neural substrates 
supporting these processes. The data we plan to collect will confirm or challenge these 
expectations, aiming to improve our understanding of the impact of SM overuse on brain 
function, cognitive state, and mental health. Our findings could also inform potential 
strategies to mitigate SM negative effects.
Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT06402253..
Estudio de los efectos de las intervenciones digitales basadas en artes 
sobre el uso de redes sociales, conectividad cerebral y la salud mental 
de los adolescentes: protocolo de estudio del proyecto SMART  
Antecedentes: Las redes sociales (RS) se han vuelto omnipresentes entre los jóvenes. Sin 
embargo, aún se debate cuáles actividades en RS resultan beneficiosas o perjudiciales para 
el bienestar de niños y adolescentes. Mientras que algunos reportes destacan resultados 
positivos de las RS en el aprendizaje, la interacción social y el bienestar, otras 
investigaciones sugieren que el uso excesivo de las RS induce una disminución en la 
atención, el control cognitivo y emocional, y aumenta los trastornos relacionados con la 
salud mental (ej, depresión y ansiedad). De forma interesante, las funciones cognitivas y 
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 7 March 2025 
Revised 1 August 2025 
Accepted 12 August 2025  
KEYWORDS
Arts-based interventions; 
adolescents; social media; 
mental health; cognition; 
brain connectivity
PALABRAS CLAVE
Intervenciones basadas en 
artes; adolescentes; redes 
sociales; salud mental; 
cognición; conectividad 
cerebral; protocolo
HIGHLIGHTS
• In today’s highly digital 
world, where smartphones 
and social media are 
ubiquitous among children 
and adolescents, debate 
persists over which online 
activities benefit youth and 
which may be harmful.
• Mental health, attention, 
cognitive and emotional 
control, as well as the neural 
underpinnings of these 
brain functions, seem to be 
negatively affected by social 
media but positively 
influenced by music, arts, 
and creative training.
• Our project –SMART– aims 
to train 13–16 year-old 
teenagers in composition 
and editing of either music 
or photography materials, 
using this artistic experience 
to promote critical thinking 
around the use of social 
media, in an attempt to 
overcome the detrimental 
mental health and cognitive  
© 2025 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which 
permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been 
published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent. 
CONTACT  Lucia Vaquero l.vaquero@nyu.edu; Pablo Ripolles pripolles@nyu.edu 6 Washington Place, New York, 10003 NY, USA
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/20008066.2025.2550079.
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
2025, VOL. 16, NO. 1, 2550079 
https://doi.org/10.1080/20008066.2025.2550079
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
2 
emocionales que se ven afectadas negativamente por el uso intenso de RS, así como algunos 
de sus fundamentos neuronales, han sido previa y consistentemente reportados como 
beneficiados por intervenciones basadas en música y las artes.
Objetivos: Aquí se presenta el protocolo para el proyecto ‘Social Media Artistic tRaining in 
Teenagers (SMART)’: se emplearán intervenciones digitales basadas en artes para enseñar a 
adolescentes a utilizar las RS de forma más estimulante y orientada a objetivos, en el 
contexto del aprendizaje de composición/edición musical o fotográfica mediante programas 
específicos de software de código abierto.
Métodos: Los participantes (de 13 a 16 años) serán evaluados antes y después de completar un 
programa de intervención de 3 meses de composición/edición musical o fotográfica. Los 
participantes también proporcionarán mediciones semanales de uso de RS y estado de 
ánimo. También se reclutará un grupo control pasivo equivalente, que será evaluado y 
seguido durante 3 meses. Las evaluaciones incluirán mediciones cognitivas (atención), de 
estado de ánimo y de salud mental (depresión, estrés, ansiedad, autoestima), así como 
biomarcadores de conectividad funcional y estructural y morfológicos obtenidos mediante 
técnicas de RNM y MEG (magnetoencefalografía).
Discusión: Esperamos cambios observables con el uso autoinformado y las actitudes hacia las 
RS, y beneficios en las mediciones de atención, estado de ánimo y salud mental, así como en los 
sustratos neuronales que sustentan estos procesos. Los datos que planeamos recolectar 
confirmarán o desafiarán estas expectativas, con el objetivo de mejorar nuestra 
comprensión del impacto del uso excesivo de RS sobre la función cerebral, el estado 
cognitivo y la salud mental. Nuestros hallazgos podrían, además, orientar estrategias 
potenciales para mitigar los efectos negativos de las RS.
1. Background
The use of digital devices (i.e. smartphones, tablets) with 
access to online activities and social media platforms has 
exponentially increased in the last decades. Currently, 
more than 60% of the global population uses the internet –with almost 95% of users connecting through their 
smartphones– and around 5 billion people have a social 
media (SM) account (Meltwater Global Digital Report, 
2024). A growing social concern is the recognition that 
this widespread digital connectedness is not just present 
among adults but is perhaps even more prevalent among 
youth. For the past two decades, children have increas
ingly been introduced to smartphones and social 
media as early as age two, and previous reports suggest 
that around 10% of 1 year-old infants are already 
being regularly exposed to these devices/sites nowadays 
(Chang et al., 2018; Durham et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2020; 
Zimmerman et al., 2007). Regarding SM usage, 40% of 
children 8–12 years old report using these sites despite 
being under the legal age to access these platforms, 
although this may be changing with modifications that 
SM companies are starting to implement, such as the 
Instagram Teen Accounts (Meta News, 2024), or with 
public-health-based governmental initiatives such as 
Australia’s Online Safety Amendment (Social Media 
Minimum Age) Act 2024 (Australian Government eSaf
ety Commissioner, 2024). Nevertheless, more than a 
third of adolescents aged 13–17 years report using SM 
‘almost constantly’ – up to 7 h per day, on average (Melt
water Global Digital Report, 2024; Office of the US Sur
geon General, 2023).
effects associated with the 
passive use of these 
platforms.
impairments on impulse control, executive functions, 
cognitive flexibility and emotional regulation, as well 
as low self-esteem and poor academic performance 
(Kim et al., 2020; Wacks & Weinstein, 2021). Impor
tantly, some investigations have shown that these 
effects can evolve into serious mental health issues at 
mid- and long-term levels, such as anxiety and 
depression disorders that can persist into adolescence 
and adulthood (Conte et al., 2025; Elhai et al., 2019; 
Ivie et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2020; Wacks & Weinstein, 
2021). However, SM effects on youth are complex and 
their overall impact can vary depending on individual 
differences (e.g. gender) and how social media is used 
(Orben et al., 2022; Vidal et al., 2024).
Interestingly, SM has also been linked to positive 
outcomes: such as promoting healthy habits, boosting 
creativity, building support communities, and helping 
in new-skill acquisition (Haddock et al., 2022; Lucero, 
2017; Vaingankar et al., 2022). According to previous 
research, prolonged used of smartphones and SM can 
elicit cognitive and affective benefits associated with 
empathic abilities in adolescents, and a greater engage
ment in health promotion activities across the lifespan 
(Gabarron et al., 2021; Manago et al., 2012; O’Reilly 
et al., 2019; Uhls et al., 2017).
Research has found evidence that excessive smart
phone use during childhood and adolescence is associ
ated with negative effects on cognitive and emotional 
control. Specifically, cognitive and mental health 
issues linked to overuse of smartphones/SM include 
At the neural level, there is limited evidence regard
ing the structural and functional brain underpinnings 
of SM use/overuse. Neuroimaging reports with adult 
participants have mainly shown a relationship 
between SM usage and brain regions and networks 
involved in reward processing and executive func
tions. Specifically, excessive use or SM overuse is 
linked to reduced grey matter volume in the amygdala, 
ventral striatum, and the nucleus accumbens (He 
et al., 2017), to enhanced connectivity between reward 
pathways (e.g. connections to ventral striatum and 
3
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex; Wilmer et al., 2019), and 
to deficient interhemispheric connectivity (e.g. corpus 
callosum, He et al., 2018). Lower or regular SM usage, 
on the other hand, has been reported to be associated 
with enhanced structural and functional connectivity 
in networks connecting reward-related areas with 
regions related to executive functions (e.g. ventral stria
tum and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; Wilmer et al., 
2019), as well as with the self-referential cognition net
work (consisting of the medial prefrontal cortex and 
posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus, and involved in 
self-reflection and comparisons with others), the salience 
network (covering the anterior insula and dorsal part of 
the anterior cingulate cortex), or the default mode net
work (see Wadsley & Ihssen, 2023 for a review). Most 
of these previous reports focused on investigating SM 
or internet addiction, and their brain structural and 
functional findings support well-known theories of 
reward deficiency, enhanced impulsivity, and sensitivity 
for immediate rewards, among others (He et al., 2017, 
2018; Montag et al., 2017; Turel et al., 2018).
These counterintuitive findings suggest that the 
negative outcomes associated with SM use may not 
directly result from excessive use itself (Montag 
et al., 2021). Instead, the relationship between well- 
being and SM use appears to be more complex, with 
individual differences playing a crucial role in how 
people experience the impact of SM. Based on pre
vious reports (Verduyn et al., 2015, 2017), we hypoth
esise that (i) the specific activities performed, (ii) 
nature of content watched online, and (iii) whether 
the use of SM is passive or active, may be crucial fac
tors determining the effect of SM use on youth’s cog
nition and mental health. This is supported by 
research showing that the beneficial or detrimental 
effects of SM on young users depend on a widespread 
array of factors, including baseline mental health sta
tus, number of SM accounts and concrete platforms 
used, purpose and type of usage of these online sites, 
and individual differences in demographic variables 
(Nesi, 2020; Orben et al., 2022; Rajamohan et al., 
2019; Vidal et al., 2024).
Interestingly, the brain networks previously linked 
to the negative impacts of SM have been shown to 
undergo positive changes following art-based interven
tions. Cognitive, creative, and artistically focused inter
ventions in children and teenagers positively influence 
wellness and induce neuroplasticity (Luis-Ruiz et al., 
2020; Roman et al., 2017; Vander Linden et al., 2019; 
Zatorre, 2013). Engaging in visual arts, aesthetic per
ception activities, and music-related practices – such 
as listening, composition, and performance – has 
been shown to enhance the connectivity of both struc
tural and functional brain networks across the lifespan. 
These activities strengthen critical cortical and subcor
tical structures, as well as key white matter pathways, 
including the cingulum, corpus callosum, and the 
inferior 
longitudinal fasciculus, among others. 
Additionally, they modulate brain plasticity functional 
systems such as the Default Mode Network, auditory 
and visual networks, and Executive Function/Cogni
tive Control networks (Bashwiner et al., 2016, 2020; 
Cheng et al., 2023; De Pisapia et al., 2016; Habibi 
et al., 2018; Hennessy et al., 2019; Hong et al., 2023; 
Hudziak et al., 2014; Jünemann et al., 2023; Li et al., 
2018; Wang et al., 2022). These plastic changes seem 
to be associated with better cognitive performance 
across domains, including verbal memory, attention, 
creativity, error prediction, and emotional control 
(Chatterjee, 2011; François et al., 2015; Moumdjian 
et al., 2017; Särkämö & Soto, 2012; Sihvonen et al., 
2017). Based on these reports, we hypothesise that 
art-based interventions could be a useful approach to 
overcome the detrimental effects of an excessive passive 
SM use in children and adolescents. We hypothesise 
that the generalised brain stimulation and enriched 
environment that art processes provide (Särkämö 
et al., 2008; Zatorre, 2013), paired with their inherent 
rewarding component (Mas-Herrero et al., 2023), will 
elicit a boost in different cognitive and emotional func
tions, that may transfer to other domains beyond those 
explicitly practiced in visual arts and musical interven
tions (although these have been less consistently repli
cated, Alain et al., 2019; Moreno & Bidelman, 2014). It 
is important to note, however, that previous reports 
suggest that when music and visual arts interventions 
are compared, music seems to be the experience associ
ated with greater plastic changes or transfer effects to 
other cognitive domains (Flaugnacco et al., 2015; Fran
çois et al., 2013; Frischen et al., 2021; Jaschke et al., 2018; 
Lu et al., 2022).
Here we present and define a protocol for the 
SMART (Social Media Artistic tRaining in Teenagers: 
https://smartproject.blog/) intervention. The main 
research question behind SMART is to assess whether 
art appreciation and practice can change the way teen
agers interact with and use SM; and whether and how 
digital arts-based interventions can help to overcome 
the negative influence of smart devices and social 
media platforms on mental health.
1.1. Goals of the current study
SMART aims to promote changes in the way teenagers 
use SM by implementing an arts-based intervention. 
The protocol combines training in accessible, open- 
source digital tools for the creation of music or visual 
art with group discussions that stimulate critical think
ing about SM. We hypothesise that the stimulation pro
vided by the art-based training together with the SM 
resources and reflections will foster a more mindful 
and balanced approach to social media use, aiding the 
participants, for instance, to be critical about the con
tent shared online, to seek healthier and more 
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
4 
respectful online interactions, and/or to look for more 
stimulating activities to do online. In other words, the 
main goal of this project is to assess how the SMART 
intervention changes SM behaviour in teenagers.
SMART’s secondary goal is to elucidate the behav
ioural and brain mechanisms behind the effects that 
the art-based training (in music or visual-arts) might 
have on cognition and mental health. Based on pre
vious work (Barnett & Vasiu, 2024; Fong et al., 2021; 
Masika et al., 2020; Särkämö et al., 2014; Sihvonen 
et al., 2017, 2020, 2021), we hypothesise that improve
ments in mental health variables will correlate with 
plastic changes in emotional and reward-related 
centres (e.g. ventral striatum, amygdala, ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex), while changes in cognitive function 
will be related to plastic changes in prefrontal regions 
related to attention and executive functions.
1.2. Target population
Teenagers aged 13–16 years (9th–10th graders in the 
USA educational system) attending participating pub
lic high schools in the New York City area. Target was 
placed on public high schools because we believe the 
population attending these institutions are more repre
sentative of the general population of New York City.
2. Methods
2.1. Summary of intervention study design
Two active groups and a passive control group will be 
included in the study, with the two active groups 
receiving one of the interventions (either music or 
visual-arts). Interventions will last for 3 months (12 
weeks), consisting of two 45-min arts-based classes 
per week, plus a 15-minute session per week focused 
on discussions, reflections, and activities around social 
media. Before and after this intervention period, par
ticipants will complete two evaluation phases where 
measures of mental-health, behaviour, and cognition 
will be collected. We will also collect weekly measures 
of mood and SM usage from all participants through 
online surveys. See Figure 1 for a schematic represen
tation of study design.
The study aims to acquire brain structural, func
tional, and neurophysiological data through magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetoencephalogr
apy (MEG) techniques. This part of the protocol will 
be optional due to restrictions imposed by the 
New York State Department of Education during 
their ethical review of the protocol. MRI and MEG 
data will be collected at the Center for Brain Imaging 
at New York University (New York City, USA).
Assessments (behavioural, neuroimaging, and neu
rophysiological data) will be done 1–3 weeks prior to 
the beginning of the intervention (baseline evalu
ation), and 1–3 weeks after the end of the intervention 
(post-intervention evaluation). Behavioural assess
ments will occur during the same class periods 
assigned for the intervention sessions (i.e. during 
regular class hours or after-school hours, as agreed 
with the participating high schools), while neuroima
ging and neurophysiological measurements will be 
conducted outside of scheduled class times.
2.2. Study setting
Data collection is planned to be conducted in the 
New York City area, through collaborative 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the SMART project design: 2 evaluations (Baseline, Post-Intervention), with a 3-month (i.e. 
12 weeks) intervention or control period. Open-source software that will be used during the interventions is depicted by their logo 
in the corresponding column: Soundtrap for the Music composition programme, and PixelR for the Visual-Arts (i.e. photography) 
intervention programme. Abbreviations: MUS: music composition/edition intervention group; VIS: photography/visual-arts com
position/edition intervention group; CON: control group with no intervention; min: minutes.
5
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
partnerships with public high schools in Manhattan 
and Brooklyn. Regular classrooms or auditorium 
spaces will be used for SMART sessions, depending 
on the availability in each high school and the size 
of the student group at the time of intervention. Stu
dents in both intervention groups will use their smart
phones to take pictures (VIS), record sounds (MUS), 
and do some level of editing through built-in and 
available editing software in their personal devices 
(VIS, MUS), and/or will use the available laptops in 
the schools – e.g. Macbook Pro A2159– (MUS). Expert 
instructors and teaching and counselling personnel 
from the participating highschools will be present at 
all intervention sessions (see details about personnel 
below).
2.3. Participants
2.3.1. Inclusion & exclusion criteria
As criteria for inclusion, students will be eligible irre
spective of their country of birth, native language, 
race, or gender. Furthermore, we will not exclude sub
jects based on their neurodevelopmental, neurological, 
or psychiatric disorders, or based on their background 
or previous training in music, visual/plastic arts, or 
f
ilm/multimedia. Thus, any student attending the par
ticipating high schools, and aged 13–16 years is a 
potential participant.
In addition, we intend to recruit the parents of child 
participants to answer questions about their child. For 
these participants, we have no inclusion criteria except 
for being the parent/guardian of a child participating 
in the study.
2.3.2. Expected demographics
Participants will be recruited from public high schools 
from our city area with which agreements have been 
set in place. Based on data from the from New York 
State Education Department (NYSED) Student Infor
mation Repository System (SIRS) regarding both gen
eral city-wide data (Zimmerman, 2023) and average 
data from our current participating research sites 
(NYC Department of Education’s 2023–24 School 
Quality Snapshot High School corresponding to our 
participating high schools), the demographics of our 
sample are expected to be: 47–56% female vs. 44– 
53% male, and 0.01% non-binary students (please 
note that the most recent official information found 
on non-binary / gender non-conformant / gender 
f
luid / gender expansive students in the city of 
implementation is from summer 2023 and is based 
on documentation that students themselves had to 
f
ill out under the approval of their parents, which 
may lead to some students deciding not to mark 
their preferential gender category); 29–30% Asian, 
3–8% Black, 26–31% Hispanic or Latinx, < 1% Native 
American/Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander, and 33– 
35% White; 16–18% students with Individualised Edu
cation Programs (IEPs); and 2–12% English-as-a- 
second-language learners. In the US education system, 
an IEP is a legal document developed for each child 
enrolled in a public school who has an identified dis
ability that requires special education. This document 
is reviewed every year to ensure the appropriate pro
gress in the child’s education (Mueller & Moriarty 
Vick, 2019; IEP definition from the NYSED official 
website).
Demographics corresponding to parents of partici
pants are expected to be similar to those of the student 
participants. According to information obtained from 
participating schools, the students that will be enrolled 
in SMART will be coming mostly from Brooklyn, with 
a few of them coming from Queens or the Bronx bor
oughs of NYC. Families with teenagers in these bor
oughs are expected to show significant economic 
diversity, which may be connected to academic per
formance disparities among our high-school stu
dent-participants. Although specific socio-economic 
status (SES) information from our participants and 
their families would have to be directly asked, we 
expect our cohort to reflect the average SES that has 
been described for our participating high schools, as 
well as from the NYC boroughs where they and 
their families live. To mention a couple of specific 
SES proxies, it is expected that between 56% and 
73% of our students would be eligible for free lunch 
(which indicates a medium-low family income, 
2023–24 NYSED Student and Educator Report corre
sponding to our participating high schools); and that 
their families present a diverse range of maternal edu
cation, from communities where only around 20% of 
adults have college degrees (the Bronx: 21–23%) to 
areas with bachelor’s degree attainment rates 
approaching 50% (Brooklyn: 46%, Queens: 34–39%) 
(Neches et al., 2024). This data suggests that our par
ticipant cohort would likely encompass both economi
cally disadvantaged and more privileged family 
contexts typical of NYC’s outer boroughs and the 
underserved public high schools they host.
2.3.3. Sample size / power analysis
A pre–post longitudinal experimental design will be 
implemented. Recruited participants (whose parents 
have given their written permission and who have 
assented to participate) will be divided in three groups: 
(a) Music composition/edition intervention (MUS 
group), consisting in a training in using music cre
ation and edition by learning to use open-source digi
tal tools combined with an introduction to music 
appreciation and structural musical concepts; (b) Pho
tography composition/edition intervention (VIS 
group), comprising image edition training using 
open-source digital tools combined with an introduc
tion to photography/visual art appreciation and basic 
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
6 
photography concepts; (c) Control group, with no 
specific intervention (CON group). Based on this 
design, a sample size analysis using MorePower 
(Campbell & Thompson, 2012) determined that, to 
have 80% of power to detect a large effect in a 2 (Base
line/Post) × 3 (Group: MUS, VIS, CON) mixed 
between-within repeated measures ANOVA, 18 par
ticipants per group are required. We intend to recruit 
30 participants per group to account for attrition.
2.3.4. Recruitment strategy
Recruitment will take place adapting to the communi
cation channels already in place at the participating 
high schools. This process will be completed by 
using flyers posted in the high school or sent to the 
families physically and/or via the high-school newslet
ter. Researchers will also attend school orientation, 
open-house events, after-school fairs and/or specific 
Q&A sessions at the schools or online to provide 
information about the study to parents and students. 
If students are interested in participating, researchers 
will have consent, assent, and parent permission 
forms available for students and their parents/guar
dians to sign. Students will be asked to contact the 
researcher if they are interested in participating. 
Once they have contacted the researcher, they will 
be given a physical parent consent form to bring 
home for their parent or guardian to sign. After 
their parents have reviewed and signed their consent 
form granting them permission to participate, stu
dents will be provided with an assent form to read 
and agree to participate.
Parents will receive an extra consent form and will 
be asked to complete questionnaires at the beginning 
and end of their child’s intervention. In that consent 
form, parents will be asked whether they would like 
to receive information about additional optional pro
cedures within this same study. If they decide to 
receive this information, the research team will 
explain the optional neuroimaging sessions their 
child could complete, and will provide the parents 
with both parental consent and child assent forms 
for both MRI and MEG sessions.
While participants for the MUS and VIS groups 
will be recruited from the participating high schools, 
two complementary strategies will be employed to 
recruit the control group: (a) utilising an internal lab 
database, and (b) extending recruitment efforts within 
the same participating high schools. In the first case, a 
database of former research participants from our labs 
and institutions who agreed to be recontacted will be 
used to find a CON group matched in age, gender, 
and socioeconomic status to the active-intervention 
groups. In both cases, participants from the database 
who agreed to participate in SMART will complete a 
baseline and a 3-month follow-up evaluation and 
will be contacted weekly to complete the mood and 
SM usage surveys and will not receive any training. 
In the second case, participants in the CON group 
recruited from participating high schools, will be 
offered to complete the training of their choice in 
the following semester after they have completed 
their participation as a control participant in the 
programme.
Student participants will be compensated for their 
time in each of the two behavioural assessments with 
a $25 Visa gift card. If any student withdraws from 
the study earlier than expected, they will be compen
sated with Visa gift cards for their first assessment ses
sion only. Parents of students participating in SMART 
will be also compensated for each of their assessments 
with a $25 Visa gift card, being only compensated for 
their first assessment if they withdraw from the study 
early. Compensation of students and parents will be 
handled independently, following each participant’s 
assessment session(s) completion. The amount allo
cated for compensating participants for their time 
invested in the behavioural assessment part of our 
protocol (i.e. $25) was chosen to match the maximum 
amount possible as per the NYC Department of Edu
cation guidelines for studies conducted in public high 
school populations.
If students choose and are given permission to par
ticipate in the optional neuroimaging part of the 
study, they will be compensated for their time with a 
$40 Visa gift card for each of the two scanning sessions 
(MEG, MRI) at each assessment point (baseline, post- 
intervention). They will also receive a $10 Visa gift 
card to reimburse their travels to NYU facilities, 
where the Center for Brain Imaging is located. If 
they choose to only complete one of the neuroimaging 
sessions or only one of the assessments, participants 
will be paid consequently, based on the sessions they 
complete. Amounts for compensating participation 
in the neuroimaging part of SMART (i.e. $40 per 
scan, $10 for transportation) were decided based on 
usual practices at NYU’s Center for Brain Imaging.
2.3.5. Group assignment procedure
Group assignments will be performed based on the 
participating high school demands and curriculum 
(during regular or after-school classes), as well as 
on teaching artists’ availability, while attempting to 
take students’ preferences into account as much as 
possible. Thus, full randomisation will not be 
implemented. Variables to control for school of ori
gin will be included in the statistical analyses to 
compensate.
2.4. Study personnel
2.4.1. Teaching artists
Teaching artists (TAs) in charge of SMART’s arts- 
based interventions have been selected to: (1) have 
7
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
extensive artistic experience in the disciplines included 
in our interventions, and (2) have experience in teach
ing and in developing and leading workshops with an 
artistic curriculum.
For the music composition/edition intervention, all 
TAs are part of the American Composers Orchestra 
(ACO) education team. ACO is a New York-based 
organisation dedicated to the creation, celebration, 
performance and promotion of orchestral music by 
American composers. ACO maintains a robust edu
cational programme for teenagers and young adults 
that leverages music composition and improvisation 
as a gateway to creative thinking.
Regarding the photography composition/edition 
intervention, agreements have been placed with free
lancing TAs, who have been selected with the follow
ing criteria: (1) professional artists showing specific 
higher education in visual-arts/filmmaking matters, 
(2) extensive experience creating and participating in 
visual arts/filmmaking projects with an important 
emphasis on photography, (3) proven experience in 
the use of open-source digital tools, and (4) experience 
teaching visual-arts / photography / filmmaking con
tent for youth audiences.
2.4.2. High school personnel
In order to adapt to actual demands of the participat
ing high schools, and to disrupt as little as possible 
their regular activities, the SMART project will be 
implemented either (a) as part of the regular advi
sory–arts’ lesson curriculum or any other open-curri
culum subject, or (b) as part of the after–school 
activities programme.
In the first case, the regular high school teacher in 
charge of the assigned subject will be present at all 
times during the intervention sessions/periods. 
These teachers will usually have a background in per
forming arts or science-related domains. In the second 
implementation alternative, personnel from the coun
selling team or other personnel assigned by the princi
pal to supervise the after-school activities will be 
present during the intervention sessions.
2.5. Description of the interventions
The curriculum / syllabus for both interventions was 
planned and developed with teaching artists and edu
cation directors of ACO –MUS intervention–, and the 
Downtown Community Television Center (DCTV, a 
non-profit organisation that aims to use filmmaking 
to inform and empower communities, with accessible 
visual-arts educative programmes) –VIS intervention. 
To create parallel content between the music and the 
photography syllabi, the intervention materials were 
created simultaneously for both types of interven
tion-groups (MUS, VIS). ACO’s Sonic Spark Lab’s 
lesson programme (https://www.americancomposers. 
org/education/sonic-spark-lab) served as the basis 
for our novel curriculum. ACO Sonic Spark Lab is 
an educational arts-integrated programme addressed 
to middle and high/school students that teaches how 
to engage creativity and imagination to transform an 
idea or ‘spark’ into an artistic project, such as a full 
song. Several aspects of ACO Sonic Spark Lab’s pro
gramme were tailored to fit the scientific demands, 
timeline, and ideas of the SMART project. The 
materials for the VIS intervention were created by 
DCTV specialists by matching the structure of the 
MUS ones, with input from the freelancing visual- 
arts TAs. The materials for the MUS and VIS interven
tion programmes, including the social media com
ponent of the interventions can be found in the 
Supplementary Materials.
2.5.1. Music composition / edition (MUS group)
Lessons in the MUS intervention will review basic 
structural musical concepts, making the students prac
tice active listening and music appreciation skills, 
while teaching them to use specific open-source 
music-composition software (i.e. Soundtrap). Specific 
software was selected to be accessible (free to use) 
and compatible with the usual digital devices the stu
dents have access to (e.g. their smartphones, tablets, 
and/or class laptops). Overall, our intervention pro
gramme will give the students tools to express them
selves and express their identity through music, 
while learning about musical storytelling through the 
creation of their own musical pieces from scratch.
2.5.2. Visual-arts composition / edition (VIS 
group)
of 
Lessons in the VIS intervention will review basic struc
tural photography/visual-arts concepts as well as his
tory 
photography to provide a linear 
understanding of how photography as a media has 
evolved, teaching the students active observation and 
visual-arts appreciation skills, and the use of specific 
open-source photography edition software (i.e. built- 
in photo editors in students’ smartphones and the 
free software Pixlr). Specific software for this interven
tion was selected to be accessible to the students (free 
to use) and usable on their class laptops or other digi
tal devices they may have access to. All in all, this 
intervention programme will give the students 
resources to express themselves and their identity 
through photography / visual-arts, while learning 
about visual storytelling through the creation of their 
own photography projects from scratch.
2.5.3. Social media component of the 
interventions
During the intervention period, activities involving 
the direct use of social media or reflections around it 
will be included, aligning with the goals and activities 
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
8 
planned for every week as part of the arts-based ses
sions. This will be implemented via guided discussions 
with the students or activities implemented in class, 
under the guidance of the SMART research team, 
for 15 min a week. Among other topics, during this 
allocated time students will participate in activities 
including: looking for artistic inspirations, comment
ing on their favourite artists, discussing popularity 
online, reflecting on what artists share online, con
verse about the expression of opinions online / hate 
culture, and giving and managing constructive criti
cisms. The social media component of the interven
tions can be found in the Supplementary Materials.
2.6. Outcome measures
2.6.1. Social media usage
We have developed a self-report questionnaire, the 
‘Usage Attitudes & Opinions about Social Media 
Questionnaire’ (UAOSMQ) to measure different 
aspects of social media usage. The questionnaire will 
be completed at baseline and post-intervention. The 
full questionnaire can be found in the Supplementary 
Materials. In addition to the UAOSMQ, participants 
will provide weekly measures of social media use. 
These measures will be collected for all groups, includ
ing the CON. The following sections specify the differ
ent SM-related measures that will be collected.
2.6.1.1. Changes in attitudes and importance given to 
SM. Changes in attitudes and importance given to SM 
will be measured using the following items of the 
UAOSMQ: 6 (open/ended question about their 
opinion of SM) and 7 (multiple forced choice or 
MFC with 5 levels, ranging from ‘Not important at 
all’ to ‘I can not imagine a day without using social 
media’).
2.6.1.2. Changes in SM profiles followed in SM.
Changes in SM profiles followed will be measured 
using the following items of the UAOSMQ: 3 (list 
where they can mark and add as many options as 
needed), 4 (MFC to mark whether the profiles fol
lowed are mostly female, male, mixed, LGBTIQ+ or 
neutral-led or if they do not know), and 5 (list to 
mark the options that apply to what they expect 
from the accounts they follow, i.e. entertainment, 
news, etc.). Furthermore, the post-intervention ver
sion of the UAOSMQ includes an item for the partici
pants to self-report on their perceived change in 
profiles they follow: item 16 (open-ended question 
about whether they have changed the profiles they 
follow).
2.6.1.3. Changes in mood and emotional reaction 
while being online. Changes in Mood and Emotional 
Reaction while being online will be measured using 
the following items of the UAOSMQ: 8, 10.1, and 
10.2 (these three items consist of lists of emotions to 
mark and add as many as apply for them in each 
situation).
2.6.1.4. Changes in detrimental behaviours while 
being online. Changes in several negative online beha
viours will be measured using UAOSMQ items: 9.1 
(MFC with 5 levels to report whether they compare 
themselves with the people they see online, ranging 
from ‘Yes, always’ to ‘No, never’) and 9.2 (MFC with 
3 levels to report how they feel when they compare 
themselves with people online, ranging from ‘Mostly 
happy’ to ‘Mostly unhappy’).
2.6.1.5. Changes in the use of smartphones during in- 
person social contexts. Changes in the use of smart
phone / social media while being with friends will be 
registered with UAOSMQ items: 13.1 (MFC with 5 
levels to report whether they use their smartphone 
while being with friends, ranging from ‘Yes, always’ 
to ‘No, never’), 13.2 (MFC with 5 levels to report 
whether they use SM specifically, when using their 
smartphones in this social gatherings, ranging from 
‘Yes, always’ to ‘Non, never’), and 14 (open-ended 
question for them to explain what they think the use 
of smartphones and SM in social contexts adds to 
the situation).
2.6.1.6. Changes in self-reported overall screen-time.
Changes in self-reported overall screen-time will be 
measured using item 1 of the UAOSMQ (MFC with 
5 levels, ranging from ‘Less than 1 hour/day’ to 
‘More than 10 hours/day’).
2.6.1.7. Changes in SM platforms and overall per
ceived usage. Using UAOSMQ item 2 (participants 
can mark and add as many options as needed), we 
will measure changes in the SM platforms used. In 
addition, during the post-intervention evaluation, 
there are 3 items that will help us measure the changes 
the participants have perceived in their usage of SM: 
15.1 (MFC with 4 levels to report whether they think 
they have changed in their way of using SM, ranging 
from ‘Not really, I use them in the same way’ to 
‘Yes, I have completely change the way I use social 
media’), 15.2 and 16 (both of them open-ended ques
tions to report how has that change been and what 
have been the changes in the profiles they follow).
2.6.1.8. Changes in types of posts shared online.
Changes in types of posts shared online will be 
measured using the following items of the UAOSMQ: 
11.1 (open-ended question about what they share 
online), 11.2 (MFC with 6 levels to report frequency 
of posting, ranging from ‘Once a month’ to ‘Several 
posts per day’), and 12 (subdivided in 6 sub-items 
9
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
showing different potential situations and then asking 
how likely they would be to share a post in that situ
ation using a MFC that reflects a range of ‘taking a 
couple of pictures or video and sharing on your favor
ite platform’ to ‘taking a picture or a video for your 
records only’).
2.6.1.9. Weekly evolution of overall screen-time.
Number of hours of screen-time use will be provided 
by each participant via a self-report questionnaire to 
be filled by using the screen-time built-in app of 
their smartphone once a week.
2.6.1.10. Weekly evolution of apps most used during 
weekday. Participants will provide the list of actual 
most-used apps and for how long has each of them 
been used during a given weekday as listed in the 
built-in screen-time app of their smartphones. Specifi
cally, we will ask the participants during a weekday 
(Tue-Fri, depending on the days the SMART team 
will be in the school in each participating site) to fill 
in the information corresponding to the previous day.
2.6.1.11. Weekly evaluation of apps most used during 
weekend day. As recorded for weekdays, participants 
will consult and annotate every week the list of their 
most-used apps and the amount of time invested in 
each of them during a weekend day. On the day of 
registering these weekly measures, we will ask the par
ticipants to fill the information corresponding to the 
previous Saturday.
2.6.1.12. Output measures from parental reports.
Parents/guardians will fill the parent/guardian version 
of the UAOSMQ as well, in order to measure parents’ 
attitudes and importance towards SM, but mostly, 
their perceptions of their children’s attitudes, usage 
and importance of SM, structured in a parallel way 
as the UAOSMQ filled by the teen participants, and 
differing on items: 1.2 (open-ended question about 
their opinion on the amount of time their child spends 
online), 6 (open-ended question about parent’s 
opinion on SM –pre-intervention–, or whether their 
opinion has changed in the last 3 months –post-inter
vention–), 7 (MFC with 5 levels, ranging from ‘less 
than an 1 hour/day’ to ‘more than 10 hours a day’ to 
measure the time the parents spend on SM), 8 (lists 
of emotions to mark and add as many as apply to 
report the feelings parents have while using SM), 
and 14 (open-ended question to report whether the 
parents have ever shared their personal opinion 
about SM with their child). The parental version of 
the UAOSMQ can be found as Supplementary 
Material.
2.6.2. Mental health markers
2.6.2.1. Evolution and changes in mood. The ‘Positive 
and Negative Affective Scale’ (PANAS – Watson et al., 
1988; primary outcome) will be collected at baseline 
and post-intervention and also on a weekly basis 
during the intervention period (or 3-month partici
pation, in the case of the CON group). The PANAS 
consists of a list of 10 positive emotion-related adjec
tives and a list of 10 negative emotion-related adjec
tives, presented in an intercalated order. Its score 
ranges from 10 to 50 for Positive Affect, with greater 
values meaning greater presence of positive mood; 
and from 10 to 50 for Negative Affect, with greater 
values meaning greater presence of negative mood.
In addition, we will also measure the baseline vs 
post-intervention potential differences in Total Mood 
Disturbance index (secondary outcome), a score 
obtained through the Profile of Mood and States 
Scale (POMS, McNair et al., 1992). The Total Mood 
Disturbance measure is calculated out of summing 
up the negative-mood subscales (Anger-Hostility: 
0–20; Confusion-Bewilderment: 0–20; Depression- 
Dejection: 0–28; Fatigue-Inertia: 0–20; Tension- 
Anxiety: 0–24) and subtract the positive mood 
subscale (Vigor-Activity: 0–24). The higher the scores 
the greater the probability of having a mood-related 
issue.
2.6.2.2. Changes in self-Esteem. We will use the 
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Questionnaire (Rosenberg, 
1965) at both evaluation timepoints to understand 
potential post – baseline differences in self esteem (pri
mary outcome). This test ranges from 0 to 30, with 
scores between 15 and 25 indicating a normal range 
and scores below 15 suggesting low self esteem.
2.6.2.3. Changes in depression. The Children 
Depression Inventory (CDI, Kovacs, 1981, 1992) will 
be used to measure post – baseline differences in 
depressive state (primary outcome) in our partici
pants. The CDI is a 27-item scale ranging from 0 to 
54: the higher the score, the higher the depressive 
state.
In addition, we will also collect the ‘Depression, 
Anxiety, and Stress Scale 21’ or DASS-21 (Lovibond 
& Lovibond, 1995). Using the DASS-21 – Depression 
subscale we will measure differences between baseline 
and 3-month/post-intervention in depression states 
(secondary outcome). 7 items are dedicated to 
measuring depression within the DASS-21 scale. 
Scores range from 0 to 42 points, with higher scores 
indicating more severe depressive symptoms: scores 
14–20 suggest moderate depression, scores greater 
than 28 suggest extremely severe depression.
2.6.2.4. Changes in anxiety. Anxiety will be mainly 
measured via the ‘Screen for Child Anxiety Related 
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
2.6.3. Cognitive markers
10 
Disorders’ (SCARED, Birmaher et al., 1997) ques
tionnaire, whose scores range from 0 to 82. Values 
greater than 25 in the total score indicate the pres
ence of anxiety disorder. Further, it can be subdi
vided in subscales for Panic Disorder (cut-off: 7), 
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (cut-off: 9), Separ
ation Anxiety Disorder (cut-off: 5), Social Anxiety 
Disorder (cut off: 8), and School Avoidance (cut 
off: 3). Hence, post – baseline differences in Anxiety 
as measured by SCARED (primary outcome) will be 
explored.
Moreover, we will measure changes in anxiety 
before and after the intervention period by applying 
the DASS-21 – Anxiety subscale (secondary outcome). 
DASS-21 dedicates 7 items to measure anxiety. Scores 
range from 0 to 42 points, with higher scores indicat
ing more severe depressive symptoms: scores 10–14 
suggest moderate anxiety, scores greater than 20 
suggest extremely severe anxiety.
Lastly, we will also measure post-intervention – 
baseline changes in social anxiety (secondary outcome) 
via the ‘Social Anxiety Scale for Adolescents’ question
naire (SAS-A, La Greca & Lopez, 1998). The SAS-A is 
an 18-item scale whose total scores range from 18 to 
90 points; it also counts with subscales in Fear of 
Negative Evaluation (8–40), Social Avoidance and 
Distress–New (6–30), and Social Avoidance and Dis
tress–General (4–20). The higher the scores, the 
greater the social anxiety symptoms (the usual rec
ommended cut-off for interpreting this test’s results 
is 50; Ranta et al., 2012).
2.6.2.5. Changes in stress. Post-intervention – baseline 
differences in stress (secondary outcome) will be 
measured via the DASS-21 – Stress subscale. 7 items 
within the DASS-21 are dedicated to evaluating stress 
states. Scores range from 0 to 42 points, with higher 
scores indicating more severe stress symptoms: scores 
19–25 suggest moderate stress, scores greater than 34 
suggest extremely severe stress.
2.6.2.6. Output measures from parental reports. Par
ticipants’ parents who decide to participate in the 
project will be asked to fill a baseline and a post- 
intervention evaluation concerning some aspects of 
their child’s mental health. Specifically, participating 
parents will fill the parent/guardian report from: 
BASC3 (a questionnaire with 29 MFC items identi
fying behavioural and emotional risk of the child, 
evaluating the relationships between the student 
and their parents, conformed by 4 subscales with 
specific ranges of normality, Reynolds & Kram
phaus, 2015), and SCARED (a test with 41 MFC 
items measuring social anxiety in their kids, with 
scores above 25 indicating potential presence of 
social anxiety in their child; Birmaher et al., 1997).
Based on previous findings of art-based interventions’ 
influence on cognitive functions (Chatterjee et al., 
2011; Flaugnacco et al., 2015; François et al., 2013; 
Frischen et al., 2021; Jaschke et al., 2018; Hennessy 
et al., 2019; Särkämö & Soto, 2012), we decided to 
assess the effects of the intervention in attention, ver
bal learning and memory, and working memory.
2.6.3.1. Changes in selective attention. Selective atten
tion will be measured via a computerised attentional 
f
lanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974; Sanders & 
Lamers, 2002) previously validated elsewhere (Orpella 
et al., 2025). In brief, in each trial, a single line formed 
with 5 arrows is displayed on a screen. The surround
ing arrows in the row could: point in the same direc
tion as the one located at the centre (congruent 
condition), point in the opposite direction (incongru
ent condition), be changed by squares (neutral con
dition), or be changed by ‘X’ symbols in which case 
the participant will have to inhibit their response 
(‘No-Go’ inhibition condition; see Figure 2(A,B)). 
Participants will be asked to respond as quickly as 
possible using the computer keyboard arrow keys 
whether the arrow in the centre of the row is pointing 
to the left or the right, except in the case of the No-Go 
trials, where the correct response is not to press any 
button. Each trial is preceded by a fixation cross dis
played in the centre of the screen for 2 s; then, the 
f
lanker stimulus appears for a maximum of 2 s and 
participants’ responses will be encoded during a win
dow of 3 s maximum after the flanker stimulus 
appears on the screen.
The task will start by presenting 24 training trials to 
familiarise the participants with the task. After each of 
these trials, feedback is provided by displaying on the 
screen the words ‘Correct!’ or ‘Incorrect!’ immediately 
after response or after the 3-second after-stimulus 
onset window if no response is provided. After the 
training trials, 72 test trials will have to be completed, 
with the same structure as the training trials but with
out any feedback displayed on the screen. Testing 
trials will be organised as follows: 18 trials per con
dition, with half of the presentations showing the 
centre arrow pointing towards the right, and the 
other half pointing towards the left. Furthermore, 
the task has been programmed so that trial duration 
is standardised in order to maintain the overall dur
ation of the task at 6 min. Trial standardisation is pro
vided by making the test trials appear exactly 5 s apart 
by introducing variable duration intervals after par
ticipants’ responses in a way that reaction time plus 
the introduced interval is always equal to 3 s; adding 
up the two seconds allocated for the pre-stimulus 
f
ixation cross presentations, results in the 5 s window 
of maximum total trial duration.
11
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the cognitive tasks. Flanker Task: (A) Depiction of the Familiarisation Phase, with fixation 
cross between trials, a possible response in the arrow-buttons of the computer keyboard, followed by the corresponding feedback 
in each case. From top to bottom, congruent, incongruent, neutral, and No-Go conditions. (B) Test Phase, with the same organ
isation and type of presentation of stimuli and conditions, but without feedback given to participants. FOIB task: (C) Target Fam
iliarisation Phase in the two possible memory set sizes (top, high or MMS7: 7 different targets; bottom, low or MMS2: 2 different 
targets). (D) Recognition test, where participants are presented with individual stimuli (faces) and they have to answer whether 
they are targets or not. Feedback is provided to reinforce memorising the correct targets. (E) Task Familiarisation & Test Phases are 
presented in the same manner: moving stimulus (i.e. faces) on a grey background, with a score counter and a Next button at the 
centre of the screen. The difference is in the first part (Task Familiarisation) participants have to achieve 50 points, while in the 
actual task (Test Phase) they have to get up to 200 points by recognising and tapping on the correct targets. Abbreviations: MMS: 
memory set size; Y: Yes; N: No.
Measures of response accuracy and reaction time 
(measured from the onset of stimulus presentation) 
for congruent, incongruent, neutral trials will be 
obtained. For No-Go trials only accuracy will be 
used as the correct answer is not to press any button 
and, therefore, reaction times cannot be collected. 
Variables from the Flanker task will allow us to 
measure post-intervention – baseline differences in 
attentional and inhibition/cognitive control functions 
(primary outcome).
2.6.3.2. Changes in focused attention and executive 
functions. A previously developed gamified task called 
‘Foraging Inattentional Blindness Task’ (FOIB) or 
‘FORAGEKID’ (Gil Gomez de Liaño & Wolfe, 2022) 
will be used for exploring focused attention and execu
tive functions at both evaluation timepoints. In collab
oration with these authors, we modified the 
FORAGEKID task to adapt the stimuli to something 
more attractive to adolescent participants (pictures 
of celebrities, instead of pictures of stuffed animals). 
The FOIB task allows the simultaneous evaluation of 
executive functions and attention development in an 
engaging and fun way, operating as a videogame. In 
this game, participants are presented with visual tar
gets and distractors that move around the screen, 
and they have to find some preselected targets as 
quickly as possible until reaching a pre-agreed score.
The task has been programmed in Matlab 2018b 
(The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA) and the Psycho
physics Toolbox version 3. The task will be presented 
on Dell Inc. Inspiron 15 3515 laptops (with Microsoft 
Windows 11 as OS) and participants will have to 
respond by using the laptop’s trackpad. Monitor resol
ution will be 1366 × 768 pixels. The stimuli (targets 
and distractors) will be randomly moving at a constant 
speed of 44 pixels/sec, changing directions at pseudo- 
random intervals. The stimuli are images of well- 
known celebrities (singers, actors, fashion models, 
politicians, etc.) presented on a homogeneous grey 
background. In the centre of the screen, a score will 
be displayed and updated, with the amount of points 
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
12 
the participant is gaining or losing, depending on their 
performance on the task (correctly identified targets 
add 1 point, non-target stimuli selected as targets 
will subtract points to the final score).
Stimuli images will be drawn from an image pool of 
150 different ‘celebrities’. Each image will be a circle 
placed on an invisible rectangle that would subtend 
a visual angle of 1.33° height, 1.00° width at a 60 cm 
viewing distance (although viewing distance will not 
be controlled). In the different screens, image presen
tation will change with possible set sizes being 40, 80 
or 120 images. Targets will constitute 20–30% of the 
presented items in each display. Participants will be 
not informed about the number of targets or set 
sizes, and targets will be randomly selected for them 
in each display. Two runs of the task will be completed 
by each participant to allow for two memory load con
ditions: Low-Load Memory Set Size with 2 targets to 
look for (MMS2), and High-Load Memory Set Size 
with 7 different targets to search (MMS7). The mem
ory set size indicates the number of potential targets 
that have to be held in memory by the participants, 
which is different from the visual set size of the num
ber of image items displayed in each presentation 
screen of the game. The order of presentation of 
MMS2 and MMS7 will be randomised across 
participants.
The task contains a short target familiarisation 
phase, in which the whole MSS is presented, followed 
by individual presentation of each image in the MSS, 
and ending with a recognition/memory test in which 
participants are presented with images adding up to 
double the size of the MSS (4 in the MSS2 and 14 in 
the MSS7, 50% of them will be targets), and asked 
one by one whether the image is a target or not. Par
ticipants will have to get at least 80% of correct 
responses to proceed with the game part of the FOIB 
task; otherwise, they will repeat the recognition/mem
ory test until reaching the 80% of correctly recognised 
targets. Participants will have to answer whether the 
presented images are targets (blue) or not (red) 
using two keys of the laptop keyboard marked with 
a sticker in blue and red colours. Responses will be fol
lowed by immediate feedback: the words ‘Correct!’ or 
‘Incorrect!’ will be displayed in the centre of the 
screen. After this, a task familiarisation phase will be 
completed, where the participants will have to recog
nise their targets among the moving stimuli, and select 
them as quickly as possible, completing a total score of 
50 points. Participants can always, at any point during 
the task, change displays by clicking on a ‘Next’ button 
located on the centre of the screen, right above the 
score counter. Travel time between displays after the 
‘Next’ button is touched is set to 2 s. After completion 
of the task familiarisation phase, a reminder with all 
targets appears on the screen. Then, the test phase 
will be completed, which will proceed as the 
familiarisation phase, but participants will have to 
reach 200 points this time. This procedure will be 
repeated for both MSS2 and MSS7 in the correspond
ing order for each participant. Total completion of the 
two runs will take around 20–30 min. See Figure 2(C, 
D,E) for a schematic representation of this task.
Diverse variables elicited from response times and 
search strategy can be computed from the FOIB task 
results. First, percentage of correct responses from the 
total tapping times (the times the participant used 
the trackpad to select a stimuli item to respond) will 
be computed. Then, regarding response patterns, we 
will study runs, defined as repetitions of target 
response (i.e. tapping the image of Billie Eilish when 
the previous tapped target was also Billie Eilish), and 
switches (i.e. tapping the image of Brad Pitt after tap
ping on Billie Eilish). Runs and switch trials will equal 
100% of correct responses. Since participants can 
change display at any point during the task, targets 
left on the previous display can be counted as misses. 
Then, when distractor items are tapped on, selected 
as targets, these will be considered as false alarm 
(FA) errors, which will grant us the computation of 
FA-Error Rates. Then, to study search quitting behav
iour, we will calculate the average rate of leaving one 
screen for the next display (calculated as the total num
ber of points collected at the point of clicking the 
‘Next’ button, divided by the time spent in the whole 
task), and the instantaneous rate of leaving for the 
next display (calculating the average reaction times 
for each of the last 10 items tapped upon right before 
clicking the ‘Next’ button, counting in reverse order 
from the display switch moment).
All these variables will give us information about 
focus attention, visual memory and visual search 
strategy, allowing us thus for the study of executive 
functions. Hence, post-intervention – baseline differ
ences in focused attention, visual search patterns and 
executive functions (secondary outcome) will be 
explored.
2.6.3.3. Changes in verbal learning and memory.
Measures of verbal learning and memory will be gath
ered via the Rey’s Auditory Verbal Learning test 
(RAVLT, Schmidt, 1996; Vakil & Blachstein, 1993), a 
standard test consisting in the presentation and 
immediate recollection of a 15-word list for five 
times, the presentation and recollection of a distractor 
list, and a final recollection of the repeated list without 
presenting it again. The higher the number in each 
trial or on the memory trial, the better the partici
pant’s verbal learning and memory functions are 
assumed. Thus, measures from the RAVLT will 
grant us the possibility of studying potential post- 
intervention – baseline changes in verbal learning and 
memory (primary outcome).
13
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
2.6.3.4. Changes in auditory working memory. Audi
tory working memory will be tested at both evaluation 
timepoints through the WAIS-V (Weschler Adult 
Intelligence Scale, Pearson) Letter Number Sequen
cing, a subtest of the IQ battery consisting of the pres
entation of letters and numbers in a mixed order, 
followed by the participant’s recollection and manipu
lation of the stimuli so that they mentally organise and 
say out loud first the numbers in increasing order, and 
then the letters in alphabetical order. Scores range 
from 0 to 21, with higher scores indicating higher 
auditory working memory abilities (Egeland, 2015: 
Wang et al., 2023). This test will allow us to explore 
potential post-intervention – baseline differences in 
auditory working memory (primary outcome).
2.6.3.5. Changes and insights from parental reports.
Parents will also fill the BRIEF2 questionnaire (Gioia 
et al., 2015), a 63 MFC-item tool to discard learning 
disabilities, attention and executive function dis
orders, and other neuro and neuropsychological 
developmental issues.
2.6.4. Neuroimaging markers – MRI
Using a 3.0T Siemens Prisma scan located at the Cen
ter for Brain Imaging at New York University, partici
pants who assent and whose parents consent of their 
participation in the neuroimaging section of the pro
tocol will complete an MRI session at baseline and 
post-intervention. This session will serve to obtain 
anatomical and structural connectivity. The following 
sequences will be collected: T1-weighted, as previously 
used to explore grey matter alterations after arts-based 
interventions (Bashwiner et al., 2016; Habibi et al., 
2018; Hudziak et al., 2014); diffusion-weighted MRI, 
to explore plastic effects on white matter after arts- 
based training (Cheng et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2023; 
Li et al., 2018); resting state data, to study differences 
in (MRI) functional connectivity at rest after arts- 
based interventions (Bashwiner et al., 2020; De Pisapia 
et al., 2016; Hennessy et al., 2019; Jünemann et al., 
2023; Li et al., 2018); and a pathology-discarding 
T2-weighted structural image.
Before entering the scanner, participants will have 
to answer a scanning contraindication form to make 
sure it is safe for them to undergo this procedure; 
everything metallic that participants may be carrying 
on their outfits / bodies will be removed and a metal 
detector will be used to guarantee participant’s safety 
to complete the MRI session.
2.6.4.1. Changes in functional connectivity at rest.
Participants will complete a 6 min-long MRI resting 
state sequence with the following parameters: voxel 
size = 2.0 × 2.0 × 2.0 mm, TR = 1000 ms, TE = 37.40 
ms, 66 interleaved slices, FoV = 208 mm. Participants 
will have to maintain their gaze looking at the screen, 
where a fixation cross will be placed in the centre for 
the total duration of this sequence (i.e. 6 min). They 
will be asked to keep their eyes open looking at the 
screen, and be relaxed but as still as possible, trying 
not to fall asleep. Resting-state information will 
grant the study of potential differences in functional 
connectivity at rest between baseline and post-interven
tion evaluations (primary outcome).
2.6.4.2. Changes in grey matter morphology / brain 
anatomy. Participants will complete a T1-weighted 
MRI sequence at both evaluations, that will allow for 
the study of participants’ cortical and subcortical 
grey matter. MPRAGE T1-weighted data will be 
acquired with the following parameters: voxel size =  
0.8 × 0.8 × 0.8mm, TR = 2400 ms, TE = 2.24 ms, 256 
interleaved slices acquired in a single shot, FoV =  
256 
mm. During the anatomical acquisition 
sequences, a neutral-relaxing video with slow-motion 
nature pictures and no sound will be displayed to 
entertain participants, and to reduce potential anxiety 
for being inside the scanner. Participants will be asked 
to be as relaxed but as still as possible and either look 
at the video or close their eyes. T1-weighted data will 
grant us the possibility of studying post-intervention – 
baseline differences in grey matter brain morphology 
(primary outcome).
2.6.4.3. Changes in brain structural connectivity. A 
diffusion-weighted MRI sequence will enable the 
study of participants’ white matter structural connec
tivity. The following parameters will be used to acquire 
this data: voxel size = 1.5 × 1.5 × 1.5 mm, TR = 4150 
ms, TE = 85.20 ms, 81 interleaved slices, FoV =  
225 mm, 128 diffusion-weighted volumes with 9 inter
leaved non-diffusion-weighted images; b-value of 
1500 s/mm2. As described for the T1-weighted 
sequence, participants will be asked to be as still as 
possible and relaxed, and to either look at a neutral 
nature video without sound or to just close their eyes.
Diffusion MRI data will allow for exploring the 
baseline vs. post-intervention differences in brain struc
tural connectivity (primary outcome).
2.6.5. Neurophysiological markers – MEG
Participants who assent and whose parents consent to 
their participation in the neurophysiological section of 
the protocol will complete an MEG session. Data will 
be collected using a 157-channel whole-head MEG 
biomagnetometer with 5-cm baseline axial gradi
ometers and max inter-sensor spacing of 2.5 cm 
(Kanazawa Institute of Technology, Kanazawa, 
Japan) scan located at the Center for Brain Imaging 
at New York University (NYU)’s premises.
Before entering the MEG scanner, all participants 
will have to fill a form with some demographic infor
mation, and will have to answer again a scanning 
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
14 
contraindication form to make sure it is safe for them 
to undergo this procedure. In order to localise their 
head position during the recordings, five electromag
netic coils will be attached to the forehead of each par
ticipant. The location of these coils will be registered 
with respect to the MEG sensors at the beginning 
and end of the experimental session. Participants’ 
head shape will be digitised immediately before enter
ing the MEG scanner using a Polhemus digitiser in 
combination with the Source Signal Imaging 3D digi
tiser software, taking into account the anatomical 
landmarks where the coils will be placed plus two 
additional points: the nasion and bilateral tragus. 
This will grant the proper alignment of MEG data 
with an anatomical magnetic resonance template or 
participants’ own MRI anatomical data, if available 
for the whole cohort. After this preparatory phase, 
participants will enter the magnetically shielded 
room, and lay supine for the whole MEG recording 
session. Visual and auditory stimuli (including the 
f
ixation cross used during the resting-state task) will 
be presented to participants by using Presentation 
software in a PC connected to the MEG display 
system.
The experimental session will consist of a resting 
state sequence, an auditory function localisation task, 
and an auditory / melodic pre-attentive change detec
tion paradigm. We decided to focus on auditory- 
related tasks (auditory localisation + auditory viola
tion-detection) because, based on previous reports 
(Flaugnacco et al., 2015; François et al., 2013; Frischen 
et al., 2021; James et al., 2024; Jaschke et al., 2018; Lu 
et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022), we hypothesise that the 
music composition intervention will have the greatest 
neuroplastic effect – when compared to the passive 
control or the photography intervention groups.
The auditory function localisation task performed 
in the middle of our session will be only used as a 
confirmation of the spatial location of auditory pro
cessing in our participants, but no post-intervention 
vs. baseline differences are expected or will be checked 
in this data. In this task, participants will be presented 
with 2 tones (250 and 1000 Hz) in an alternating way 
with a jitter at 900, 1000, 1110, 1200 and 1300 ms. 
Each tone will be presented 100 times, with a duration 
of 0.40 ms each time. Stimulus presentations will be 
done through the MEG-compatible headphones, 
while we ask participants to fixate their gaze on a 
f
ixation cross displayed at the centre of the screen. 
The duration of this task will be 5 min.
2.6.5.1. Changes in neurophysiological correlates of 
pre-attentive auditory detection. A previously vali
dated melodic multi-feature MMN paradigm (Putki
nen et al., 2014; Vaquero et al., 2021) will be 
implemented. MMN responses are consistently 
evoked and detected in healthy participants when 
presenting them with a sequence of repeated auditory 
stimuli –standard– that gets suddenly altered by a less 
probable stimulus –deviant– that changes particular 
sound features (duration, frequency, or intensity of a 
tone, the interstimulus interval, etc.). These sound fea
tures suppose a combination of different character
istics or the presentation of more complex patterns, 
or that imply the absence of an expected trait in the 
pattern with respect to the previously presented 
stimuli (Grimm & Escera, 2012; Näätänen et al., 
2005). Interestingly, previous works in the field have 
reported observable modifications in MMN responses 
after musical training or long-term practice (Paraske
vopoulos et al., 2012; Putkinen et al., 2014; Virtala et 
al., 2014).
Thus, during this paradigm, participants will be 
presented with a silent movie (an excerpt from ‘Mod
ern Times’ –Charles Chaplin, 1936– prepared expli
citly for this experiment) and asked to pay attention 
to it. At the same time, participants will be passively 
presented via MEG compatible headphones with a 
continuous melodic stream where standard melodies 
get altered in melodic or rhythmic features. The 
MMN responses to these auditory violations have 
been suggested to reflect pre-attentive detections of 
discrepancies between the input sound and what was 
predicted based on the previous auditory presentation, 
implying that there is a memory trace serving as an 
internal template against which sensory inputs get 
compared to in a sort of automatic fashion (Koelsch 
et al., 2019; Näätänen et al., 2007; Winkler et al., 
2009). The visual stimuli (silent film, in this case) 
ensures thus that participants’ attention is on the 
visual and not the auditory stimuli. Participants were 
instructed to pay attention to the action of the 
movie, and asked after the experiment to respond to 
a 10-item questionnaire about the movie. The score 
in this questionnaire will be used as a proxy of the 
level of attention participants were paying to the visual 
stimuli.
The auditory stimuli consists of 360 brief melodies 
previously composed specifically for this paradigm 
(full details about these melodies are described in Put
kinen et al., 2014). In brief, they are melodies played 
on acoustic piano tones respecting the Western tonal 
rules and recursively repeated. Melodies start with a 
triad (300 ms) followed by four tones varying in 
length, with a 50-ms gap between each tone, and fol
lowed by a final tone whose duration is 575 ms. 
Each melody lasts 2100 ms, and they will be presented 
with a 125 ms gap between them. The whole exper
iment lasts for 15 min, where participants will be pre
sented with these melodies in a looped manner.
Six different deviants can be included in the melo
dies: three low-level changes (i.e. not affecting the 
melodic contour) and three high-level changes (i.e. 
modifying the melodic contour). Melodies can contain 
15
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
more than one deviant or change. Low-level changes 
are: (i) Mistuning: moving upwards the pitch of a 
tone half a semitone, 3% of the fundamental frequency 
of the original sound (appearing in 20% of the total set 
of melodies); (ii) Timbre Deviant: the timbre of one 
tone is change for that of a flute (instead of the original 
piano played for the rest of the tones, happening in 
16% of the melodies); (iii) Rhythm Mistake or Timing 
Delay: including a 100 ms silence gap (appearing in 
17% of the melodies). High-level changes are: (i) Mel
ody Modulation: altering the third or four tone of a 
melody in pitch (happening in 22% of the melodies, 
this slightly alters de presented melody and continues 
until a new Melody Modulation appears); (ii) Rhythm 
Modulation: affecting the second or third tone, in this 
deviant a long tone gets replaced by a short tone 
(shortening) or a short tone gets replaced by a long 
one (lengthening) by introducing the reversal of the 
duration of two sequential tones (appearing in 22% 
of the melodies); (iii) Transposition or Key Change: 
the whole melody gets transposed by one semitone 
up or down its original key (happening in 26% of 
the melodies) –after a transposition, the following 
melodies stay in the transposed key until a new Trans
position deviant appears (Tervaniemi et al., 2014). All 
deviants were musically plausible, and the high-level 
variants become the new repeated form of the melody 
in the following presentations in a roving-standard 
fashion (Cowan et al., 1993). Only one deviant of the 
same kind can occur within each melody, and each 
single tone can be altered only by one type of deviant. 
After a high-level change, the ‘new standard’ melodic / 
rhythmic pattern or key will be repeated at least once 
(on average, three repetitions happen) before the next 
change of the same kind appears.
The MMN paradigm will be repeated in the MEG 
protocol at both evaluation times. This way, we will 
explore whether there are any differences after the inter
vention in these neurophysiological correlates of pre- 
attentive musical/auditory detection (primary outcome).
2.6.5.2. Changes in functional connectivity at rest 
within different frequency bands. A resting state 
sequence with eyes open will be collected at both 
evaluation timepoints. Participants will have to fix 
their gaze on a fixation cross displayed on the screen 
in front of them while laying on the MEG bed, without 
doing any particular task. This sequence will last for 5 
min. Potential baseline vs. post-intervention differences 
in brain connectivity at rest between brain sources of 
interest will be calculated within different frequency 
bands (secondary outcome) and compared between 
groups.
2.6.6. Intervention observation measures
In addition to the TAs, a team member will attend 
every lesson of each intervention group (MUS, VIS) 
and will collect information about treatment fidelity 
and student engagement.
2.6.6.1. Treatment fidelity. Accuracy and fit between 
the actual lessons carried out and the original planned 
lesson programmed for every week and session of the 
intervention will be annotated. These annotations will 
take the form of a percentage of accuracy and fit to the 
original plan –in other words, treatment fidelity (sec
ondary outcome).
2.6.6.2. Students’ engagement during interventions.
During each intervention session, participants’ attend
ance and engagement (secondary outcome) will be 
recorded and rated using a 1–7 Likert scale.
2.6.6.3. Students’ feedback about the intervention. At 
the end of the intervention, students participating in 
the active groups (MUS, VIS) will fill a questionnaire 
in order to rate how much they have liked the inter
vention programme, and express their opinions 
about the type of intervention programme in which 
they have participated. We will use a brief question
naire specifically developed for this purpose (see Sup
plementary Materials).
2.7. Data management and storage
Subjects will be identified by a code for data files that 
will be used for analysis within the study team. The 
correspondence between identifiable data and partici
pant codes will be in an encrypted file in a RAID server 
to which only the principal investigator (PI) has access 
to. Physical copies of informed consents will be stored 
in a secured locked cabinet in the PI’s office at 
New York University. Anonymized behavioural, neu
roimaging and neurophysiological data will be stored 
in a local computer within NYU premises for data 
analysis. The complete anonymized dataset and 
workflow, with specific instructions for potential rea
nalysis and replication, will be made publicly available 
(shared with NYU and non-NYU affiliated research
ers) at OpenAIRE, Zenodo, or similar public reposi
tories. Identifiable data will be deleted after 5 years 
of data collection. For this protocol paper, all data 
and materials are available in the supplementary 
materials.
2.8. Statistical analysis
All behavioural analysis and analysis performed on 
neuroanatomical, structural or functional connectivity 
values extracted from neuroimaging or neurophysiolo
gical data will be performed using JASP computer soft
ware (JASP Team (2024); Version 0.19.3; https://jasp- 
stats.org/), R (R Core Team (2021); version 4.1.2; 
2021-11-01; https://www.R-project.org/), MNE-python 
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
16 
(Gramfort et al., 2013), the CONN toolbox (Whitfield- 
Gabrieli & Nieto-Castanon, 2012), Statistical Para
metric Mapping software package v.12 (SPM12, Well
come Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, 
UK, available at: https://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/), 
FMRIB Software Library (FSL www.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/), 
and the Automatic Fiber Quantification software 
(AFQ, Stanford University, described in Yeatman 
et al., 2012). For details see Supplementary Materials, 
section Statistical Analysis).
2.9. Monitoring, safety & ethics
The study was designed and is being carried out in 
accordance with the declaration of Helsinki (World 
Medical Association, 2013). The initial proposal for 
this project was reviewed, specifically regarding ethical 
concerns, by the European Commission in Research 
and Innovation. The final protocol has been reviewed 
and approved by the Institutional Review Board of 
New York University (NYU Protocol Record IRB- 
FY2023-7419), and the Institutional Review Board of 
the New York City Department of Education (NYC 
DOE IRB protocol number 4952). All study personnel 
engaging with students in the high schools –including 
TAs– have or will complete general ethics education 
applied to behavioural cognitive studies (CITI train
ing), as well as appropriate federal background checks 
and fingerprinting (for child abuse and any other 
criminal activity clearance) to work within the public 
school system.
Furthermore, this study protocol has also been 
reviewed and registered as a Clinical Trial within the 
US National Institutes of Health system (Clinical
Trials.gov, trial number: NCT06402253).
Recruitment processes will be carried out and clo
sely monitored with personnel from the participating 
high schools. Supervisors from all the collaborating 
institutions will monitor and ensure the appropriate 
development and completion of the protocol.
Treatment fidelity and students’ engagement will be 
monitored at every intervention session, and a field 
diary will be implemented to note as many details as 
possible of both positive and negative outcomes, feed
back, or maladjustment that may occur during the 
development of the interventions, but also the project 
as a whole.
2.9.1. Mental-health issues response protocol
Since the beginning of the partnership with the differ
ent research sites, the scientific team of SMART has 
worked closely with the counselling team of the parti
cipating high schools to guarantee that any mental- 
health or safety issue detected in any of the student 
participants during SMART evaluations, weekly sur
vey completion, or intervention sessions is properly 
and timely addressed. To that end, a mental-health 
issue response protocol tailored to the resources of 
each participating high school, as well as a mental- 
health resource document, were created in collabor
ation with the counselling department of each partici
pating high school. These documents and protocols 
were originally inspired by materials from the Hartley 
Lab at NYU and are attached to this manuscript in 
Supplementary Materials. All involved personnel in 
SMART will follow the Mental Health Response Pro
tocol adjusted to each research site’s resources, when 
and if needed.
2.9.2. Consultation and communication with 
direct stakeholders
Collaborating high school personnel participated in 
the development of the intervention programme, 
and are going to be consulted at least weekly to best 
adapt the implementation and individual sessions 
and activities to the student group’s general work- 
load, mood, and specific requirements during the 
implementation period. Further, each intervention 
session contains activities that can be easily adapted 
to specific requirements or preferences of the student 
group. As such, participating students will be con
sulted for preferences and interests at least weekly, if 
not in every session, to maintain an appropriate level 
of motivation throughout the sessions, while at the 
same time keeping the rigour and main structure of 
the intervention so that it is still replicable.
Lastly, in addition to the communication efforts 
planned for this project targeting scientifically and 
general audiences (frequent updates on the project’s 
website, outreach activities and articles, formal articles 
in scientific journals), two specific communication 
initiatives will be implemented to ensure that partici
pating families, students and high-school personnel 
get to know the results of the data collected and the 
implications and conclusions that our project may 
have. First of all, at the end of the data collection 
period for the active groups, a SMART Exhibition 
will take place to share basic information about our 
participating cohort, personnel and institutions, as 
well as to showcase the students’ artistic works. This 
event will invite all enrolled students and their 
families, the involved and directive personnel from 
the participating high schools, as well as the SMART 
research and teaching-artist team and other potential 
stakeholders. Lastly, an end-of-the-project symposium 
event is planned. Its objective will be to communicate 
to all involved personnel and stakeholders the results, 
conclusions, and potential implications of our project. 
A summary of our findings, as well as any official pub
lications whenever they are ready will be made avail
able and shared with all participants, families, high 
school personnel, research and teaching artists team, 
and any other potential identified stakeholder.
17
EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTRAUMATOLOGY 
3. Discussion
The main motivation and research question behind 
SMART is whether art appreciation and practice can 
change the way teenagers interact with SM, overcom
ing the negative influence of smart devices and SM 
platforms, and ultimately leading to beneficial cogni
tive and emotional effects.
We expect that the designed interventions, due to 
their artistic content, emphasis on critical thinking 
and promotion of a more stimulating use of SM, will 
be able to modify the attitudes and opinions that teen
agers have of SM, as well as modify the activities they 
perform online. Importantly, we expect our interven
tions to positively affect mental-health markers, lead
ing 
to 
a 
post-intervention 
improvement in 
depression, anxiety, stress and self-esteem indicators. 
At the cognitive level, better executive functions and 
attentional performance is expected after the 3- 
month interventions.
Further, we expect this cognitive and mental-health 
improvement to be paired with brain structural and 
functional / neurophysiological changes (see Figure 3). 
Specifically, we hypothesise that improvements in 
mental health will correlate with plastic changes in 
GMV of emotional and reward-related centres such 
as ventral striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
(Cheng et al., 2023; Särkämö et al., 2014; Vaquero 
et al., 2016). We expect cognitive improvements to 
be related to plastic changes in prefrontal regions 
and networks related to attention and executive func
tions (as measured by structural and functional MRI) 
(Hennessy et al., 2019; Jaschke et al., 2018).
Functional connectivity measured by fMRI at rest is 
also expected to show more efficient patterns post- 
intervention in the active groups (MUS, VIS) when 
compared to the passive control groups, and especially 
significant effects are hypothesised for the MUS group 
in comparison with the other two groups (Bashwiner 
et al., 2020; Hennessy et al., 2019; Jünemann et al., 
2023; Li et al., 2018). Structural MRI data is expected 
to show alterations in audio-motor and visual regions 
and structural networks, but also in limbic and cogni
tive control related regions/pathways (Bashwiner 
et al., 2016; Cheng et al., 2023; Habibi et al., 2018; 
Hong et al., 2023; Hudziak et al., 2014; Li et al., 2018).
In addition, the neurophysiological pre-attentive 
responses to musical alterations within a melodic stream 
(MMN responses) are expected to be faster and/or 
greater in amplitude post-intervention, specifically in 
the MUS group (as measured by MEG; Putkinen et al., 
2014, 2021; Tervaniemi et al., 2014). Regarding MEG- 
measured functional connectivity at rest, there are not 
that many descriptions in the literature that can help 
us draw specific expectations. Nevertheless, based on 
previous reports (Lu et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022), 
we hypothesise that effects on theta bands from regions 
related to executive functions will show post-interven
tion changes in the active groups (especially, in MUS).
We also expect the students involved in the active 
interventions to show increased engagement during 
the classes led by our teaching artists. Further, in 
SMART, we are targeting public high schools from 
the NYC area in order to provide artistic resources 
to underserved youth communities that may have 
difficulties accessing these kinds of resources (both 
Figure 3. Schematic representation of the brain regions and networks that have been described to be negatively affected by social 
media and positively affected by artistic interventions/practice. SMART interventions are thus expected to have some plastic 
effects in these regions/networks and/or the cognitive domains supported by them. Laterality is not taken into consideration 
in this visualisation. Abbreviations: ACC: Anterior Cingulate Cortex; PCC: Posterior Cingulate Cortex; Inf: Inferior.
L. VAQUERO ET AL.
18 
artistically and mental-health related) or education 
elsewhere. Our interventions may also serve as a 
potential career or hobby discovery for the partici
pants, which can promote long-term benefits related 
to their well-being and motivation.
We expect SMART to require adjustments during its 
implementation. For example, recruitment strategies 
and contact with prospective participants and their 
families are going to depend greatly on the participating 
high schools’ communications strategy and infrastruc
ture. Resources such as the laptops to use during the 
interventions will also depend on the participating 
high schools’ hardware and other resources’ availability. 
Even though the TAs selected for this project have 
extensive teaching and arts-based experience and have 
been trained specifically to implement the SMART pro
ject according to our research and scientific-team guide
lines, the fact that different TAs will be in charge of 
implementing the intervention sessions may add some 
variability in the results that could be difficult to control 
for (if not post-hoc, during the statistical analyses). 
Finally, adjustments in the intervention programme 
due to unforeseen circumstances, environmental issues 
related to the high schools’ context, difficulties or 
specific characteristics from the particular cohort of stu
dents, etc., may be necessary, potentially diverging from 
our original plan and intervention curriculum. Other 
miscellaneous issues we foresee could be related to 
data acquisition, such as loss of data due to technical 
or human errors. The team will be trained to follow 
the established protocol and avoid to the maximum 
extent possible these kinds of mistakes.
If the predicted benefits afforded by digital artistic 
interventions are confirmed, the SMART project 
could break new ground in the treatment of the adverse 
effects of SM in teenagers and might have an impact in 
policy-making regarding adolescents’ mental health 
and education. Projects like SMART have the potential 
to guide and promote public health ventures that could 
advise youth to use the arts paired with a creative and 
critical thinking approach to use digital devices, per
form online activities and overall use SM in a healthier 
way. Moreover, the conclusions and materials devel
oped within this project have the potential to be applied 
in clinical contexts (e.g. health education, therapeutic 
purposes) in a wide array of physical and mental health 
conditions, even beyond adolescents. For instance, 
arts-based interventions like the ones proposed here 
could be developed for the management of stress, 
depression, and anxiety symptoms associated with 
chronic health conditions, both in the physical and 
mental health realms (such as cancer, major 
depression, Parkinson’s disease, long COVID-19, chil
dren treated with growth hormone therapy, or ADHD, 
among others; de-Graft Aikins et al., 2024; Mas-Her
rero et al., 2023; Saville et al., 2025; Sihvonen et al., 
2017), and could be beneficial both for patients of 
those conditions or their main caregivers (Bourne 
et al., 2021; Pérez-Núñez et al., 2024).
Finally, as an overall goal and expectation, we hope 
SMART conclusions help us raise awareness around 
the beneficial impacts on well-being that arts-related 
activities can have during adolescent development.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Karolina Świder, Prof. 
Beatriz Gil Gomez de Liaño, Prof. Rosa María Baños Rivera, 
Dr. Luis Fernandez-Luque and Prof. Fernando Maestu 
Unturbe for their helpful insight provided during the initial 
planification of the project. Also, we would like to thank 
Prof. Catherine Hartley for her invaluable assistance in all 
steps of the design, planification, and preparation for 
implementation processes, especially in the preparation of 
the neuropsychological and mental well-being assessment, 
and the creation of the mental-health resources document; 
as well as Prof. Beatriz Gil Gomez de Liaño for her feedback 
and insight regarding the design of the cognitive evaluation 
included in SMART, and more specifically, for her support 
concerning the FOIB task. Further, we would like to thank 
Isabelle Burger-Weiser for her crucial assistance during 
the processes of IRB revisions and amendments that have 
been needed to obtain ethics approval for the SMART pro
tocol. Lastly, we would like to thank the Principals, Assistant 
Principals, Counseling Team, Safety and Security, and 
Administrative personnel from all participating high 
schools for making the implementation of this project poss
ible; especially, to Kaye Houlihan, Alicia Perez Katz, Rosaria 
Mancini, Laura Kaplan, Stephanie Smith, Jacob Baty, Ismail 
Salem, and Thomas Oberle.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the 
author(s).
Funding
In addition, LV holds a Horizon Europe funded Marie Sklo
dowska-Curie Action Global Postdoctoral Fellowship 
(Grant Agreement ID# 101063319). PR, Prof. Catherine 
Hartley, and LV were recipients of a 2023 Grant for Music 
Research from the GRAMMY Museum Foundation. 
ELMV is a recipient of the Steinhardt Doctoral Fellowship 
Program. JLM is a 2024 awardee of the ‘Washington 
National Opera/The Kennedy Center American Opera 
Initiative’ and an ‘American Opera Project Fellow’ (2023- 
2025). LO is a recipient of the 2025 Media Art and Tech’s 
Marco Cosio fellowship (Brown Institute for Media Inno
vation, Columbia Journalism School & Stanford Engineer
ing – Columbia University).
ORCID
Lucía Vaquero 
Karleigh Groves 
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0361-0771
http://orcid.org/0009-0006-4904-8568
Eva Luna Muñoz-Vidal 
9052
Franziska Degé 
Elisa García-Mingo 
http://orcid.org/0009-0008-2081- 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1046-076X
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8448- 
1849
Pablo Ripollés http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8463-3723
