Social media is harming 
adolescents at a scale large 
enough to cause changes 
at the population level
Jonathan Haidt
Stern School of Business, New York University
Zachary Rausch
Stern School of Business, New York University
We thank Anum Aslam, Nikolaus Greb, Jacob Lebwohl, Carmen Hui Jing Lim,  
Mckenzie Love, Jason Lu, Alec McClean, Emma Park, Bennett Sippel, David Stein, 
Richard Layard, Barry Grimes, Mariano Rojas, the full editorial team for the  
World Happiness Report, and the several anonymous reviewers who provided 
invaluable feedback on early versions of the draft.
doi.org/10.18724/WHR-G490-BG86
This version was last updated on 11 March 2026. Please see worldhappiness.report for the latest data.
So where do  
digital media  
products fall on  
this spectrum?  
Are they more  
like bicycles  
or guns?
World Happiness Report 2026
Key Insights
Is social media use reasonably safe for children and adolescents?  
We call this the “product safety question”, and we present seven  
lines of evidence showing that the answer is no.
The evidence of harm is found in: 1) surveys of young people;  
2) surveys of parents, teachers, and clinicians; 3) contents from  
corporate documents; 4) findings from cross-sectional studies;  
5) findings from longitudinal studies; 6) findings from social media 
reduction experiments; and 7) findings from natural experiments. 
We show there is now overwhelming evidence of severe and  
widespread direct harms (such as sextortion and cyberbullying), and 
compelling evidence of troubling indirect harms (such as depression 
and anxiety). Furthermore, we show that the harms and risks to  
individual users are so diverse and vast in scope that they justify the 
view that social media is causing harm at a population level. 
We further argue that when these lines of evidence are considered 
alongside the timing, scope, and cross-national trends in adolescent 
wellbeing and mental health, they can help answer a second question: 
was the rapid adoption of always-available social media by adolescents 
in the early 2010s a substantial contributor to the population-level 
increases in mental illness that emerged by the mid 2010s in many 
Western nations? We call this the “historical trends question”. We 
draw on our findings about the vast scale of harm uncovered while 
answering the product safety question to argue that the answer to 
the historical trends question is “yes”.
69
World Happiness Report 2026
Introduction
In this essay, we address an academic debate 
whose resolution carries enormous implications 
for public policy, legal liability, and parental 
decision-making: is social media safe for  
adolescents? By “safe” we mean a product  
whose ordinary use does not place young users  
at substantially elevated risk of mental health 
problems (especially depression and anxiety)  
or regularly expose them to serious direct harms. 
The average US teen now spends nearly five 
hours per day on social media (which includes 
roughly 2 hours on YouTube, 1.5 hours on TikTok, 
and 1 hour on Instagram).1 A recent survey found 
that one-quarter of 13- to 14-year-olds in the US 
were on social media for seven or more hours 
each day.2 While time spent varies across coun
tries (see Chapter 5), five hours per day can be 
considered ordinary common use, and even seven 
is not unusual. Are these levels safe? We refer to 
this as “the product safety question”.
By “adolescence” we mean the broad develop
mental period from roughly ages 10 to 19.3 Puberty 
occurs in the first part of adolescence, usually 
beginning around ages 9 to 11 and reaching 
completion for most adolescents by age 15 or 16. 
Puberty is of special interest because it is well 
known as a period of very high brain plasticity.  
It is a “sensitive period” in which environmental 
factors and repeated experiences (such as  
watching very short videos for many hours each 
day) are especially likely to alter neuronal growth, 
pruning, and myelination.4 
By “social media” we mean platforms that include 
user profiles, user-generated content, networking, 
interactivity, and (in most cases) algorithmically 
curated content. Platforms such as Facebook, 
Instagram, Reddit, Snapchat, TikTok, X, and 
YouTube all share these features.5 This means 
that ordinary use includes interacting with  
anonymous adult strangers.
Photo Aisvri on Unsplash
70
World Happiness Report 2026
Social media use can harm adolescents in many 
ways. Direct harms include exposing them to 
videos of graphic pornography and real-life 
violence, facilitating cyberbullying and deepfakes, 
promoting dangerous “challenges”, connecting 
them with sexual predators, and facilitating the 
purchase of illegal drugs. As far as we know, no 
researchers challenge the claim that millions of 
adolescents around the world experience these 
harms every year on the major platforms.6 These 
experiences are so common that they should also 
count as ordinary use.
But social media use can also harm adolescents 
indirectly, by gradually making them more  
anxious and depressed, or more prone to  
self-harm and eating disorders.7 These mental 
health outcomes have garnered the largest  
body of research and are at the centre of the 
f
iercest scientific debate. Therefore, in evidence 
lines four to seven we will focus on the indirect 
harms and, in particular, elevated risks of  
depression and anxiety from heavy use of  
social media (five or more hours per day) over  
an extended period of time. These harms are 
often found to be more substantial for girls.  
But our larger argument about the product  
safety question is about the totality of harms –  
direct and indirect, to boys as well as girls.  
Are these harms happening at a scale large 
enough to change population-level measures  
of mental health?
The historical trends question
There is a different but related question often 
asked about social media: was the spread of 
social media in the early 2010s (as smartphones 
were widely adopted) a major contributing cause 
of the big increases in adolescent depression, 
anxiety, and self-harm that began in the US and 
other Western countries soon afterward? We call 
this the “historical trends question” because it 
concerns changes across entire populations, 
measured over many years. 
Multiple studies and long-running surveys show 
that adolescent mental health and wellbeing 
declined across many Western nations in the 
2010s, before the arrival of the COVID-19  
pandemic.8 To take one example, between 2015 
Multiple studies and long-running 
surveys show that adolescent 
mental health and wellbeing  
declined across many Western 
nations in the 2010s, before the 
arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic.
and 2018, there were nearly universal declines  
in life satisfaction among 15-year-olds in the 
Program for International Student Assessment 
(PISA). Out of 47 countries and territories with 
PISA data, for both 2015 and 2018, 40 revealed 
statistically significant evidence of a decline, six a 
statistically insignificant outcome, and only one – 
Republic of Korea – a statistically significant 
increase. These declines were strong and universal 
for both boys and girls.9 Similarly, in that same 
dataset, there were nearly universal increases in 
adolescent school loneliness between 2012 and 
2018 (increases in 34 out of 35 countries).10  
For additional studies and a discussion of 
cross-national trends in adolescent mental health 
and wellbeing, see the online appendix. 
Answering the historical trends question is more 
difficult than answering the product safety 
question. Surveys and experiments run today can 
provide strong evidence about whether social 
media use is safe for individual teens right now, 
but they are insufficient, on their own, to settle 
debates about what caused historical trends that 
began over a decade ago.11 
In this essay, we begin by focusing on the  
product safety question. We show that the 
answer is “no”, social media is not safe for  
adolescents. Additionally, the evidence we lay  
out reveals direct and indirect harm on a scale  
so vast – affecting millions of adolescents each 
year in the US alone – that it becomes evidence 
that those harms are causing changes at the 
population level. This makes it more plausible that 
the answer to the historical trends question is 
“yes”, which means the wholesale movement of 
adolescent social life onto social media platforms 
that began in most Western nations in the early 
or mid 2010s was a substantial contributor to the 
71
World Happiness Report 2026
large increases in mental illness (especially 
depression and anxiety) at the population level, 
which began soon afterward in many countries.
The structure of this essay
To address the product safety question, we 
present seven independent lines of evidence.  
We begin with three lines of evidence which, 
collectively, we refer to as “testimony”. These 
testimonies reveal what adolescents report about 
their experiences; what parents, teachers, and 
clinicians observe; and what company documents 
and insiders reveal about design choices and 
known risks. These three lines of testimony are 
evidence that social media platforms are causing 
a variety of harms to adolescents.12 
We then turn to the four lines of evidence that 
constitute most of the academic debate: 
cross-sectional studies, longitudinal studies, 
randomised controlled trials (RCTs), and natural 
experiments. These studies typically examine or 
manipulate the number of hours per day that 
young people spend using social media and relate 
them to measures of wellbeing or mental health. 
We show that these four lines, taken together, 
undermine the hypothesis favoured by Mark 
Zuckerberg and some researchers that social 
media use is merely correlated with poor mental 
health rather than causing it.13
Combining all seven lines of evidence reveals 
consistent and converging evidence that the 
major social media platforms such as Facebook, 
Instagram, Snapchat, TikTok, and X, as they are 
currently designed and commonly used, are 
dangerous consumer products that harm  
adolescents at a massive scale. The evidence  
of harm – both direct and indirect – is so strong 
and comes from so many sources in so many 
countries that we believe policymakers around 
the world now have enough evidence to justify 
action to protect children and adolescents. 
Which standard of evidence?
We will present seven lines of evidence in a 
framework modelled after a legal proceeding. 
Most readers have seen enough courtroom 
dramas to understand how an attorney lays out a 
Combining all seven lines of  
evidence reveals consistent and 
converging evidence that the 
major social media platforms  
such as Facebook, Instagram, 
Snapchat, TikTok, and X, as  
they are currently designed and  
commonly used, are dangerous 
consumer products that harm 
adolescents at a massive scale.
case against a defendant in a series of exhibits. 
But if the readers of this essay are the jury, then 
what standard of proof should they use? In a 
criminal case, the standard is very high: “beyond 
a reasonable doubt”. The prosecuting attorney 
must convince the jury that the defendant is 
almost certainly guilty. This high standard is 
necessary because a false positive (convicting an 
innocent person) is a much graver error than a 
false negative (acquitting a guilty person). 
But a lower standard is used in a civil trial:  
“the preponderance of the evidence”. The jury’s 
task is simpler – decide, based on the evidence  
presented, whether the plaintiff is probably  
right or probably wrong. This standard is  
appropriate because there is little reason to  
think that either error is vastly or consistently 
worse than the other. 
So what is the right standard for the jury in our 
imaginary legal case about the product safety 
question? It would be absurd to insist that the 
evidence must prove guilt “beyond a reasonable 
doubt”. The cost of incorrectly concluding that 
social media is unsafe is not very large. The main 
cost is that children would have to wait a while – 
until the age of 16, according to some reform 
proposals – before they could open social media 
accounts. There are plenty of other ways for  
them to communicate and connect online and  
in person. And, as we’ll show in Exhibit A, many 
young people say they would prefer to wait if 
everyone else waited too.
72
World Happiness Report 2026
In contrast, the cost of the opposite error –  
incorrectly concluding that social media is safe 
for adolescents – is catastrophically high. If the 
case we lay out below is even partially correct, 
then the cost of not acting is to condemn millions 
of children to higher levels of mental illness, 
self-harm, and online victimisation. 
We therefore ask you, the reader, to use the 
preponderance standard.14 As you consider our 
seven lines of evidence, please evaluate whether 
the preponderance of the evidence indicates that 
the major social media platforms are probably 
safe for children and adolescents, or whether they 
are probably not safe. 
We also want to be transparent about our own 
beliefs. We come to this essay having written a 
book (The Anxious Generation) that argues that 
social media use poses significant risks to  
adolescents, and that the current evidence base 
supports policy changes. We are making the case 
for the prosecution. Nonetheless, we aim to 
present the evidence fairly and transparently, and 
to engage with counterevidence where it exists. 
There are many researchers who agree with us,15 
and there are many who don’t. We urge you to 
read the work of our critics alongside this essay.16 
Let’s begin.
Photo Jerry Wang on Unsplash
73
World Happiness Report 2026
Evidence Line One:  
What the victims say
If the victim of a crime gets a good look at the 
alleged perpetrator, the prosecutor often calls 
that victim to the stand to tell her story. In this 
case, that victim is Gen Z (born 1996 to 2011 or 
so).17 They were the first people to go through 
puberty while using social media platforms  
that were constantly accessible on their new 
smartphones (beginning around 2012). When  
they look at their lives so far, do they feel grateful 
that these products were a part of their  
childhoods? Or do they believe that the social 
media platforms harmed them? If we could call 
Gen Z to the witness stand, what would they say? 
 Exhibit A:  
Surveys of young people show harm and regret
Each year, the Pew Research Center releases a 
survey on US teens’ experiences with social 
media, and consistently finds that many report 
direct negative effects firsthand.18 In 2024, nearly 
one-third of respondents reported being on  
at least one social media platform “almost  
constantly”.19 Among teenage girls, 20% said it 
hurts their confidence, 25% said it harms their 
mental health, and 50% said it negatively affects 
their sleep.20 34% of teen girls (and 20% of teen 
boys) said it makes them feel worse about their 
own lives. At scale, this amounts to many millions 
of US adolescents. 
The study also found that many adolescents  
point to benefits. The most common benefits 
cited were that “what they see makes them feel 
more accepted or as if they have people who will 
support them through tough times” (52%), that  
it gives them a creative outlet (63%), and makes 
them feel more connected to what is happening 
in their friends’ lives (74%). However, the relevant 
product safety question is not whether some 
users (even a majority) report benefits, but 
whether a substantial share experiences harm. If 
teens were surveyed about alcohol, many would 
likely report benefits as well; that is not relevant 
to the product safety question. 
A more revealing test is to ask young people 
whether, in retrospect, they wish these products 
had never been invented. In a US survey of Gen Z 
adults (ages 18 to 27), that we conducted with the 
Harris Poll,21 regret was low for products such as 
YouTube (15%), Netflix (17%), and messaging apps 
(19%), but much higher for social media platforms: 
34% wished Instagram had never been created, 
43% said the same about Snapchat, and nearly 
half expressed regret about TikTok (47%) and X 
(50%). In other words, one-third to one-half of 
young adults wish that some of the platforms 
they use for five or more hours each day had 
never existed.22
We are not the only ones to find this high level of 
regret. A 2023 study led by Leonardo Bursztyn 
found that 58% of US college students would 
prefer a world without Instagram and 57% without 
TikTok. Even among active users, one-third of 
TikTok users and over half of Instagram users said 
the same.23 The researchers also asked how much 
money they would have to pay participants to 
give up TikTok or Instagram for a month. The 
answer? $59 and $47, respectively. But when 
asked how much it would take if most others on 
their campus also gave up the apps, the average 
answer dropped below zero. In other words, the 
participants were willing to pay the researchers to 
help them and their peers get off social media. 
You can read more about this study and the 
concept of ‘product traps’ in Chapter 6.
In the UK, a nationally representative survey 
conducted by More in Common in 2025 found 
that 62% of young people (ages 16 to 24) believe 
social media does more harm than good for those 
under 16, rising to 66% among Gen Z women.  
55% said life would be better if social media were 
banned for under-16s, compared to 22% who said 
it would be worse.24 A different survey, by BSI, 
the UK’s national standards body, finds similarly 
grim assessments in 2025 from young people in 
the UK (ages 16 to 21) about their online lives.25
Australian survey data show similar patterns,  
with young people identifying social media as a 
leading contributor to declining youth mental 
health.26 In sum, when the apparent victims are 
surveyed, they positively identify social media as 
the perpetrator. There is little gratitude27 and a  
lot of regret expressed toward these companies 
and their products,28 at least across three  
74
World Happiness Report 2026
75
English-speaking countries. More work is needed 
in other countries, but other chapters in this 
report analyse the global data we have so far. 
 Exhibit B: 
Internal surveys from social media companies 
show that Gen Z perceives high levels of harm 
In October 2021, Facebook whistleblower Frances 
Haugen released thousands of internal documents 
and screenshots revealing that the company was 
well aware of the many harms its platforms were 
causing teens.29 We will cover what Facebook/
Meta’s leaders and employees said in a later 
exhibit. For now, we will focus on the surveys 
they conducted or commissioned about the 
experiences of their young users. 
Among the most widely cited of these findings is 
an internal study – covering Brazil, India, Indonesia, 
Japan, Türkiye, and the United States – showing 
that one in three teen girls said Instagram made 
their body image issues worse (while 22% said it 
improved their body image).30 Meta researchers 
also analysed qualitative data (i.e., what the teens 
said in their own words). From the report they 
submitted to Meta: “Teens blame Instagram for 
increases in the rate of anxiety and depression 
[…] This reaction was unprompted and consistent 
across all groups.”31 
A separate internal survey of 50,590 Instagram 
users across 10 countries – Australia, Brazil, 
France, Germany, India, Japan, Mexico, Republic 
of Korea, the UK, and the US – found that more 
than one-third of teen girls (37%) reported often 
Figure 3.1: % of US youth (ages 18–27) who wish social media platforms didn’t exist
Harris Poll (2024) 
50%
34%
37%
47%
43%
21%
19%
17%
17%
15%
X (Twitter)
TikTok
Snapchat
Facebook
Instagram
Smartphones
Messaging apps
The internet
Netflix
YouTube
World Happiness Report 2026
Photo Erik Mclean on Unsplash
or always seeing posts that made them feel  
worse about their bodies, compared to 26% of 
users overall.32
Two years after the release of the Facebook  
Files, another whistleblower, Arturo Béjar, came 
forward with internal research he had led at 
Instagram.33 His study of more than 200,000 
Instagram users, known as the Bad Experiences 
and Encounters Framework Survey, offered a 
snapshot of what teens were facing on the 
platform.34 The picture was alarming. Among 
Instagram users aged 13 to 15, 13% reported 
receiving unwanted sexual advances – in the  
past week alone. That same percentage had seen 
violent, bloody, or disturbing images during the 
same time frame, and 28% reported witnessing 
bullying on the platform. 
Additional internal research from other platforms – including Snapchat and TikTok35 – reveals 
similarly troubling patterns. In a 2024 court  
f
iling by the Nebraska Attorney General,  
evidence drawn from TikTok’s own internal 
studies showed that:
76
World Happiness Report 2026
[U]sers found that overuse of TikTok 
caused “negative emotions”, “interfered 
with [users’] obligations and productivity”, 
and led to “negative impacts […] on  
their lives”, including “lost sleep, missed 
deadlines, poor school performance, 
running late, etc.” It reported that “many 
participants described their use of TikTok 
disturbing their sleep, which limited their 
productivity and performance the follow
ing day”, and that “[e]very participant 
indicated that time management on 
TikTok was especially difficult compared 
to other social media platforms.”
Across the board, these internal user surveys  
and related documents reveal that the companies 
know that millions of their young users perceive  
a great deal of harm to themselves and their 
peers from the ordinary use of these products. 
In a courtroom, it is powerful when a victim  
points to the defendant and says “he did it”. The 
exhibits we highlighted – surveys of adolescents 
from independent organisations like Pew as well 
as the social media companies themselves – make 
it clear that Gen Z is pointing to social media 
platforms as the perpetrator.
Of course, the victim could be mistaken or  
could be lying, so direct positive identification is 
strengthened when corroborated by eyewitness 
testimony. The same logic applies here, so let’s 
move to our second line of evidence and call a 
variety of witnesses to the stand.
Evidence Line Two:  
What the witnesses say 
One of the most striking patterns we encountered 
in our research and conversations is that in every 
group of adults that works closely with young 
people – parents, teachers, school counsellors, 
doctors, coaches, therapists, and more – many  
tell us they’ve seen firsthand a dramatic shift in 
kids’ mental health beginning in the 2010s, well 
before the arrival of COVID-19. Their testimony 
corroborates the claims made by so many  
members of Gen Z.
Internal user surveys and  
related documents reveal  
that the companies know that  
millions of their young users  
perceive a great deal of harm  
to themselves and their peers 
from the ordinary use of  
these products.
 Exhibit C:  
Parents fear social media and perceive harm
Parents are on the front lines. They know their 
children intimately. They watch closely as new 
experiences, relationships, and technologies 
shape their children’s development. When  
something changes, parents are often the first  
to notice and to care.
When it comes to social media, most parents  
are deeply concerned about its impact on their 
children’s wellbeing. They’re not just reacting to 
headlines or stories about a crime committed  
far away, as in media-driven panics over comic  
books in the 1950s. Rather, parents are observing  
changes in their children’s behaviour, moods, 
sleep, and self-esteem after they give their 
children touchscreen devices and social media 
accounts. Parents see how these products and 
platforms are affecting their kids’ daily lives. In 
survey after survey, they corroborate the claims 
made by members of Gen Z in Evidence Line One.
A 2025 Pew survey of US teens and their parents 
found that 44% of parents identified social media 
as the single most negative influence on teen 
mental health, ahead of “technology generally”.36 
Similarly, the 2025 UK survey by More in Common 
(discussed in Exhibit A) asked parents to identify 
what most negatively affects their own children’s 
mental health. The top response was “social 
media use/excessive screen time”, followed by 
concerns closely linked to digital technology, 
including exposure to harmful online content, 
bullying, low self-esteem, and lack of sleep (see 
Figure 3.2 below).
77
World Happiness Report 2026
78
In our own research with the Harris Poll, we 
surveyed 1,013 US parents to gauge regret, as  
we did with Gen Z (see Exhibit A).37 Specifically, 
we asked parents to reflect on the role of various 
products in their children’s lives by considering 
the sentence: “When I think about my child’s 
experience growing up, I wish ____ had never 
been invented.” Their responses are shown in 
Figure 3.3.
Not surprisingly, few parents expressed regret 
about bicycles (9%), even though many children 
have been injured riding one. Bicycles are viewed 
as positive tools for growth and independence, 
despite their risks. In contrast, most parents  
see products like alcohol, guns, and pornography 
as clearly harmful in the context of childhood 
development.
So where do digital media products fall on this 
spectrum? Are they more like bicycles or guns?
For some items, like smartphones and YouTube, 
there was ambivalence: about one-third of  
parents said they wished these had never been 
invented, but the majority did not. But for social 
media platforms, especially Facebook, Instagram, 
TikTok, and X, the results were far more stark. A 
majority of parents said they wished social media 
had never been created. For TikTok and X, 62% of 
parents expressed regret – higher than for alcohol 
and equal to guns.
Figure 3.2: The biggest negative effects on young people’s mental health, 
according to UK parents
More in Common (2025) 
45%
2%
9%
12%
7%
10%
17%
31%
4%
10%
12%
22%  
9%
12%
19%
32%
Social media use/Excessive screen time
Exposure to harmful content online
Bullying
Low self-esteem or self-confidence
School workload (homework and exams)
Lack of sleep
Difficulty making or keeping friends
Body image concerns or eating disorders
Financial difficulties at home
Lack of access to green spaces or outdoor play
Conflict within the family or at home
Substance use (e.g., smoking, alcohol)
Concerns about global issues (e.g., climate change, war)
Physical health issues
Don’t know
Other (please specify)
World Happiness Report 2026
79
It’s not just parents in Anglophone countries who 
are worried.38 An Ipsos survey of parents with 
school-age children, conducted in 30 countries, 
found that mental health was the top concern, far 
ahead of physical health.39 The survey also found 
that majorities in all 30 countries favoured banning 
everyone under the age of 14 from having a social 
media account, although concerns about social 
media were generally higher in developed Western 
nations than in developing nations.
Parents are not unanimous, but increasingly,  
and across many nations, they are expressing 
their beliefs that smartphones and social media 
are harming their children.
Figure 3.3: Percentage of US parents who wish social media platforms didn’t exist
Harris Poll (2024) 
72%
60%
53%
62%
56%
44%
26%
17%
34%
20%
14%
9%
62%
57%
45%
33%
19%
62%
55%
38%
20%
15%
Mature online content
Guns
TikTok
X (Twitter)
Snapchat
Alcohol
Instagram
Social media
Facebook
ChatGPT
Messaging apps
Smartphones
YouTube
Video games
Location sharing tools
Streaming services
Basic mobile phones
Large vehicles
Television
Newspapers
Radio
Bicycles
“When I think about my child’s experience growing up,
 I wish __ had never been invented”
World Happiness Report 2026
Photo Fajar Herlambang Studio on Unsplash
Exhibit D:  
Educators perceive harms to education  
and mental health
Another group of adults with a front-row view  
of what is happening to young people are the 
teachers and school administrators who see them 
every school day. These adults witness firsthand 
how students behave, focus, interact, and learn. 
Many have been around long enough to witness 
how students have changed since 2010. So what 
do they see? Do they view social media as a 
relatively benign tool for social connection, or  
as something more harmful?
In recent years, several important surveys have 
explored exactly this question. These studies  
span different countries and school roles.
One 2024 study conducted by the television 
network NBC surveyed 559 US elementary and 
secondary school principals about the impact of 
smartphones and social media on their students.40 
Just 1.3% believed that concerns about these 
technologies were “overblown”. In contrast, 42.2% 
said they firmly believe that smartphones and 
social media are “major causes of deteriorating 
student mental health”. When asked about the 
effects of smartphones on their own student 
bodies, large majorities said that they see these 
harmful effects: distraction and tiredness;  
depression, anxiety, and loneliness; as well as 
student conflicts and bullying. Few said they  
saw evidence of benefits, such as improving 
students’ work (3.4%) or improving their mental 
health (5.6%).
80
World Happiness Report 2026
What about the teachers themselves? A 2024 
survey of 2,889 US educators – members of  
the National Education Association – asked 
participants to rate how much various factors 
contribute to student mental health challenges  
in their schools.41
The top concern was “lack of parental involvement 
and communication” (92%). But just below that 
were two factors that point directly to technology: 
84% of educators said that “social media use” 
contributes to student mental health issues, and 
81% said the same for “cell phone or personal 
device use after school hours”.
Beyond mental health, US educators overwhelm
ingly agree that social media and smartphones 
are a major source of distraction that interferes 
with learning. In a recent Pew survey, 72% of  
US high school teachers said that cell phone 
distraction is a major problem in their classrooms.42 
Another survey of 595 US educators from EdWeek 
Research Center found that approximately nine 
out of ten believe social media harms students’ 
communication skills, their treatment of others, 
and girls’ mental health.43
We find similar concerns among teachers in other 
Western countries, including England,44 Spain,45 
and France.46 One survey of teachers (80% of 
sample), school leaders, and parents across the 
European Union found that 54% believe that 
mobile phone use negatively affects the overall 
school environment, 56% reporting a negative 
impact on social interactions and wellbeing, and 
71% reporting that it worsens students’ ability to 
focus.47 Taken together, these findings show that 
the belief that social media and smartphones are 
harming students’ education and mental health is 
The belief that social media  
and smartphones are harming 
students’ education and mental 
health is not isolated or fringe.  
It is the dominant perception 
among educators across many 
Western nations.
not isolated or fringe. It is the dominant perception 
among educators across many Western nations. 
They stand in the witness box, point to social 
media platforms, and say: “They did it”. 
 Exhibit E:  
Clinicians perceive harm to mental health  
(according to Meta)
A third group with deep insight into young 
people’s lives are mental health clinicians. They 
work closely with young people, observe their 
problems firsthand, are trained to identify and 
treat their distress, and see how those challenges 
change over time. So what do they report about 
social media’s impact on their clients?
While there is limited research available on the 
views of clinicians, Meta itself conducted a 
mixed-methods study of more than 1,000  
psychiatrists, psychologists, therapists, and social 
workers to answer this question.48 According to 
f
indings disclosed in court documents from a 
Multi-District Litigation brought by US school 
districts, 81% of clinicians said social media 
exacerbates anxiety disorders in their patients, 
78% said it worsens depressive disorders, and 
85% agreed that social media can be addictive.  
In other words, Meta itself found that clinicians 
believe that social media platforms are causing 
harm to adolescents.
We close our discussion of Evidence Line Two 
with an observation about the witnesses. No 
group or occupational category that works 
closely with children has come forth to say that 
social media is, overall, beneficial for adolescent 
mental health. No group or professional body has 
stepped forward as a character witness to say 
that the defendants are benefactors to young 
people, or that they are not the sort of companies 
that would knowingly harm young people. 
As we will show in Evidence Line Three, they are 
very much the sort of companies that knowingly 
harm young people.
81
World Happiness Report 2026
Evidence Line Three:  
What company documents  
and insiders reveal
Executives and some employees at TikTok, Snap, 
and Meta know (or seem to believe) that they  
are causing widespread harm to adolescents on 
their platforms. Quotations and statistics revealed 
through whistleblowers, lawsuits, and leaked 
documents and studies from inside the major 
social media companies make this clear.49  
We’ve compiled and organised such quotes and 
statistics – including direct quotes, internal slide 
decks, and stories of teens harmed.50 Journalists 
such as Jeff Horwitz at The Wall Street Journal 
and Reuters have also reported extensively  
on the matter.51 We also created a website,  
MetasInternalResearch.org, which compiles all  
of the publicly available information about dozens 
of internal research projects carried out by Meta 
and brought out by whistleblowers, or in the 
process of discovery during legal proceedings.
Below we highlight just a few of the most revealing 
internal quotations and statistics. These are 
admissions from company insiders and external 
consultants hired to offer advice.
 Exhibit F:  
TikTok knows or believes that it is  
harming children at an industrial scale
In our essay “TikTok Is Harming Children at an 
Industrial Scale”,52 we collected direct quotations 
from TikTok employees and executives, drawn 
from the briefs of two court cases, and posted 
online by the Attorneys General of Kentucky and 
Nebraska.53 Here are just a few of the most 
incriminating quotations. The text in boldface 
comes directly from company employees and 
internal memos. The normal text around it was 
supplied by attorneys to frame the quotes.
“Compulsive usage correlates with a 
slew of negative mental health effects 
like loss of analytical skills, memory 
formation, contextual thinking,  
conversational depth, empathy, and 
increased anxiety”, in addition to  
“interfer[ing] with essential personal 
responsibilities like sufficient sleep, 
work/school responsibilities, and  
connecting with loved ones.” 
—TikTank Report, an internal TikTok 
research group 54
“The product in itself has baked into  
it compulsive use.” 
—TikTok executive
“The reason kids watch TikTok is  
because the algo[rithm] is really good 
[…] But I think we need to be cognizant 
of what it might mean for other  
opportunities. And when I say other 
opportunities, I literally mean sleep,  
and eating, and moving around the room,  
and looking at somebody in the eyes.”
 —TikTok executive 55
Internal documents highlight the fact  
that minor users are “particularly  
sensitive to reinforcement in the form  
of social award”, have “minimal ability  
to self-regulate effectively”, and “do  
not have executive function to control 
their screen time”.
—TikTok internal document 56
The full list of quotations is much longer.57 The  
evidence is clear: TikTok employees know they 
are harming millions of children.
Executives and some employees 
at TikTok, Snap, and Meta know 
(or seem to believe) that they  
are causing widespread harm to 
adolescents on their platforms. 
Quotations and statistics revealed 
through whistleblowers, lawsuits, 
and leaked documents and studies 
from inside the major social  
media companies make this clear.
82
World Happiness Report 2026
Photo Zulfugar Karimov on Unsplash
Exhibit G:  
Snap Inc. knows or believes that it is harming 
children at an industrial scale
Our second essay in this series was “Snapchat Is 
Harming Children at an Industrial Scale”.58 As we 
did for TikTok, we drew quotations from a legal 
brief that was posted online, in this case by the 
Attorney General of New Mexico.59 The results are 
just as incriminating. One of the most widespread 
of the serious direct harms on Snapchat is  
sextortion, which causes great distress to its 
victims and sometimes leads directly to suicide  
as an escape from deep shame.60 As of 2022,  
Snap was internally aware that they receive:
“[A]round 10,000 user reports of  
sextortion each month,” and “that  
10k monthly reports likely represents  
a small fraction of this abuse as this is  
an embarrassing issue that is not easy  
to categorize in reporting.”
—Snap Trust and Safety Team Member 61
One year later, in March of 2023, an 
employee stated “God I’m so pissed  
that we’re over-run by this sextortion  
shit right now. We’ve been twiddling  
our thumbs and wrung our hands all  
f…ing year.”
—Snap employee 62
It’s not just sextortion; Snap’s design makes it an 
excellent platform for cyberbullying, which is also 
a common cause of death by suicide:
In a February 2022 ‘In-App Reporting 
Research’ deck by Snap’s consultant, Snap 
found, “cyberbullying, both anonymous 
and from known contacts, was a  
commonly cited problem [among users] 
[...] Disappearing messages can embolden 
bullies to harass people with less fear  
of consequence.”
—Internal research deck from Snap  
consultant 63
83
World Happiness Report 2026
Because Snapchat is a way by which anonymous 
adults can easily reach young people once they 
connect with any young person (via the “quick 
add” or “find friends” feature), it is a vector for 
the sale of many illegal and dangerous products: 
An undated internal Snap presentation 
acknowledged that Snap had a “problem” 
with drugs and guns; that dealers are 
using Snapchat’s “sharing mechanisms” 
“to reach teens on Snapchat they would 
never encounter in real life” and that 
“some teens have even died as result of 
buying drugs that they found through 
Snapchat”.
—Snap internal presentation 64 
While quotations about depression and anxiety 
do not seem to be as common at Snapchat as 
they are at Instagram and TikTok, the evidence 
that Snapchat’s design facilitates a variety of very 
dangerous encounters is strong, and these direct 
harms can cause anxiety and exacerbate mental 
illness. Snap employees know they are harming 
millions of young people, and they know that 
these harms are directly linked to specific product 
design choices that they made.
Exhibit H:  
Meta knows or believes that it is harming  
children at an industrial scale
In September 2021, whistleblower Frances Haugen 
brought out thousands of pages of internal 
Facebook reports, memos, and emails. The Wall 
Street Journal published these revelations in a 
series of articles titled The Facebook Files.65 Below 
we draw quotations from those documents, as 
well as from disclosures by Arturo Béjar,66 anoth
er whistleblower from Meta, and from New 
Mexico v. Meta and Northern District of California 
v. Meta, two major ongoing lawsuits.67 
[…] [A]n internal Meta email to Adam 
Mosseri stated “[o]ur overall goal  
remains total teen time spent […] with 
some specific efforts (Instagram) taking 
on tighter focused goals like U.S. teen 
total time spent.” Another 2018 email 
stated Meta’s focus succinctly: “Short 
summary is ‘the young ones are the best 
ones.’ You want to bring people to your 
service young and early.”
—Internal Meta email 68 
Facebook’s founding President, Sean 
Parker, in 2017: The thought process that 
went into building these applications, 
Facebook being the first of them […] was 
all about: “How do we consume as much 
of your time and conscious attention as 
possible?” “And that means that we need 
to sort of give you a little dopamine hit 
every once in a while, because someone 
liked or commented on a photo or a post 
or whatever. And that’s going to get you 
to contribute more content, and that’s 
going to get you […] more likes and 
comments.” “It’s a social-validation 
feedback loop […] exactly the kind of 
thing that a hacker like myself would 
come up with, because you’re exploiting 
a vulnerability in human psychology.” 
“The inventors, creators – it’s me, it’s 
Mark [Zuckerberg], it’s Kevin Systrom  
on Instagram, it’s all of these people – 
understood this consciously. And we  
did it anyway.”
—Facebook founding president 69 
“There are reasons to worry about 
self-control and use of our products”  
and presenting a “quick rundown of 
evidence” – including “[a]n experiment 
[which] found that a 1-month break  
from Facebook improved self-reported 
wellbeing.” In response, another senior 
data scientist at Meta (who also holds a 
PhD in neuroscience, and taught a  
university course on addiction) warned: 
“It seems clear from what’s presented 
here that some of our users are addicted 
to our products. And I worry that driving 
sessions incentivizes us to make our 
product more addictive, without providing 
much more value. How to keep someone 
returning over and over to the same 
behavior each day? Intermittent rewards 
84
World Happiness Report 2026
are most effective (think slot machines) 
reinforcing behaviors that become 
especially hard to extinguish – even 
when they provide little reward, or cease 
providing reward at all.”
—A member of Meta’s core data science 
team and a senior data scientist at Meta 70
“Oh my gosh yall IG is a drug […] We’re 
basically pushers […] We are causing 
Reward Deficit Disorder bc people are 
binging on IG so much they can’t feel 
reward anymore […] like their reward 
tolerance is so high […] I know Adam 
[Mosseri] doesn’t want to hear it —  
he freaked out when I talked about 
dopamine in my teen fundamentals leads 
review but its undeniable! Its biological 
and psychological […] the top down 
directives drive it all towards making 
sure people keep coming back for more. 
That would be fine if its productive but 
most of the time it isn’t […] the majority 
is just mindless scrolling and ads.”
—A chat between two UX Meta  
researchers 71
Meta employees know they are harming millions 
of children and adolescents. They know this  
from their own research. As Sean Parker said, 
they knew what they were doing, and they did  
it anyway.
We have now examined the first three lines of 
evidence. Let us pause for a moment to evaluate 
the case so far. We have shown that:
•  The victims identify the defendants as having 
harmed them (Exhibits A and B). 
•  Multiple witnesses who had a clear view of the 
scene agree (Exhibits C, D, and E). 
•  The defendants themselves talked and wrote 
extensively about the many ways that their 
products were harming adolescents (Exhibits F, 
G, and H). 
We believe that these eight exhibits, comprising 
three distinct lines of evidence, are sufficient in 
themselves to answer the product safety question. 
The answer is: no, social media platforms are not 
safe for children and adolescents. Even the 
people who run them say so, in private, which 
may explain why many tech executives place  
very severe restrictions on their own children’s 
exposure to smartphones and social media.72
Let us now turn from the three lines of “testimony” 
to the four lines of academic research that are at 
issue in academic debates over social media and 
adolescent mental health: cross-sectional studies, 
longitudinal studies, randomised controlled trials 
(RCTs), and natural experiments. 
Our goal is not to provide a comprehensive 
review of the academic literature, but rather  
to explain the four main kinds of studies that 
researchers are debating, and to show that,  
within each line, there are many studies showing 
compelling evidence of harm. We also show that 
the studies most often cited as failing to show  
risk or harm do, in fact, show risk or harm when 
the analysis is “unblended” or when other  
problems are fixed.
Evidence Line Four:  
Cross-sectional studies 
The most common type of study surveys  
hundreds or thousands of young people (often 
college students) about their daily social media 
use (self-reported in hours per day) and their 
mental health (also self-reported). Researchers 
who conduct these cross-sectional studies are 
trying to determine if there is an association 
between social media use and adolescent mental 
health outcomes. Cross-sectional studies do  
not establish causal relationships on their own, 
but they are a first step in public health and 
epidemiological research. If heavy users of  
social media are much worse off than light users 
(after controlling for relevant factors), then there 
is more reason to suspect a causal relationship 
than if there had been no association, or a  
reverse association. 
85
World Happiness Report 2026
86
These cross-sectional (or correlational) studies 
now number in the thousands, but researchers 
differ on how to interpret the findings. Most 
studies find statistically significant associations; 
heavy users of social media are nearly always 
found to be in worse mental health than light 
users or non-users.73 But some researchers 
interpret the associations as being “too small to 
warrant policy change”74 while others (including 
us) interpret the associations as being much  
more worrisome, and comparable in size to other 
public health risks for which societies take action. 
Which camp is correct?
 Exhibit I:  
Cross-sectional studies show that heavy  
users have elevated risk of depression
One of the most careful studies to date analysed 
data from 10,904 14-year-olds in the UK Millennium 
Cohort Study.75 The authors found that adolescents 
who spent five or more hours per day on social 
media were about two times more likely to  
meet criteria for depression than those who used 
it for less than one hour per day (see Figure 3.4 
below). In this study, heavy social media users 
(five or more hours per day) constituted roughly 
one-fourth of 14-year-old girls and 10% of boys.
Additional studies reinforce these findings.76  
A 2022 meta-analysis found that the odds of 
depression increased by about 13% for every 
additional hour per day of social media use  
(OR = 1.13).77 Given that the average adolescent 
now spends roughly five hours per day on social 
media in the US (4.4 hours for boys, and 5.3 for 
girls),78 this translates into a very large cumulative 
risk. Using these numbers, we can extrapolate 
that even average daily use is associated with 
over a 50% increase in the risk of depression 
compared with little or no use – with even larger 
effects among girls.79
Figure 3.4: The association between depression in UK 14-year-olds 
and hours spent on social media per weekday
Kelly et al. (2019)
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
 None .5 hr 1 hr 2 hrs 3 hrs 4 hrs 5+ hrs
Girls
Boys
Clinically relevant symptoms (%)
World Happiness Report 2026
In this same UK Millennium Cohort Study dataset, 
the risk elevation of heavy social media use for 
depression among girls (RR = 2.65 between those 
who spend more than five hours a day and those 
who spend less than one) is comparable to that of 
sleep deprivation (sleeping less than seven hours 
per night, RR = 2.45) and victimisation by online 
harassment (RR = 2.56).80 The risk elevation from 
heavy social media use is greater than the risk 
elevation from poverty (RR = 1.22) for adolescent 
depression.81
These elevated risk findings were central to the 
US Surgeon General’s warnings in 2023 and 
2024.82 Citing studies which documented that 
high levels of social media use predicted double 
the future risk of depression among adolescents,83 
the Surgeon General cautioned that heavy and 
problematic use of social media poses “profound 
risk” to youth mental health. 
Yet, some researchers do not account for these 
f
indings and argue that there is little or no associ
ation between social media use and adolescent 
mental health. They tend to cite a few influential 
studies to make their case. In the section below, 
we show that even these studies, when analysed 
correctly, reveal risks to adolescent mental health. 
 Exhibit J:  
Studies that report null findings actually  
yield significant associations when examining 
adolescent girls, heavy social media use,  
and internalising disorders 
Many of the most-cited “null” findings focus on 
broad wellbeing scales that dilute the primary 
outcomes of concern – anxiety and depression in 
adolescents. One of the most influential reviews 
that critics use to dismiss the harms of social 
media was conducted by Jeff Hancock and 
colleagues in 2022.84 Their meta-analysis of 226 
studies was prominently cited in the National 
Academies of Sciences report Social Media and 
Adolescent Mental Health, which Mark Zuckerberg 
cited for exoneration in front of the US Senate.85 
The headline claim in their abstract was that 
“social media use is not associated with an 
aggregated measure of well-being” (r = 0.01). 
Here, the aggregated wellbeing outcome  
blended together questions about anxiety and 
depression with eudaimonic and hedonic  
wellbeing as well as social wellbeing, which is  
not a mental wellbeing outcome.
Yet, Hancock and colleagues themselves found 
that when the aggregated wellbeing measure is 
unblended and narrowed down to measures of 
internalising disorders, the correlations are  
much larger: r = 0.18 for anxiety, and r = 0.13  
for depression.86 
In another study widely cited by researchers in 
the “too small” camp,87 a re-analysis found much 
larger associations.88 When the three large  
datasets in that study were “unblended” so that 
associations between social media use (not all 
digital media) and internalising disorders (not a 
broad measure of many diverse outcomes) were 
calculated for girls (not all teens), the associations 
were, once again, much larger.
These examples show why apparent “null”  
f
indings should not be taken at face value.  
Blending populations, technologies, and  
outcomes can often suppress the associations  
at the centre of the debate about social media’s 
effects on adolescent mental health.89 Once these 
studies analyse the core hypothesis that heavy 
social media use is causing internalising disorders 
in adolescent girls, social media’s exonerating 
evidence ends up pointing in the same direction 
as Exhibit I: adolescents who are heavy social 
media users are at substantially elevated risk for 
depression, especially girls. 
Blending populations,  
technologies, and outcomes  
can often suppress the  
associations at the centre  
of the debate about social  
media’s effects on adolescent 
mental health.
87
World Happiness Report 2026
Evidence Line Five:  
Longitudinal studies 
The longitudinal literature on social media and 
mental health allows researchers to follow  
individuals over time and can help clarify whether 
social media use predicts subsequent changes  
in mental health, whether poor mental health 
predicts subsequent social media use, or some 
combination of the two. The available longitudinal 
studies present clear and consistent evidence  
that social media use predicts later depression,  
as we’ll see in Exhibits K and L.
 Exhibit K:  
Social media use at Time 1 predicts 
depression at Time 2
Overall, recent high-quality work provides  
support for the hypothesis that heavier use of 
social media predicts later increases in depressive 
symptoms90 – especially when the focus is on 
time spent on social media and depressive out
comes in adolescent populations. Bidirectional 
effects have also been documented, with some 
evidence that declining wellbeing predicts subse
quent increases in social media use, particularly in 
studies that rely on broader definitions of use, 
wider age ranges, or broad measures of wellbeing.
The strongest evidence comes from recent 
large-scale cohort studies. An analysis of a 
sample of 6,595 US adolescents, ages 12–15,  
found that heavy social media use predicted  
later increases in internalising symptoms.91 Using 
the longitudinal Adolescent Brain Cognitive 
Development (ABCD) dataset, findings showed 
that increases in social media use predicted 
subsequent increases in depression.92 Meanwhile, 
other researchers using the ABCD dataset 
showed that earlier internalising disorders failed 
to predict subsequent social media use.93 A study 
which focused on “screen time” extended this to 
younger children, documenting bidirectional 
relationships: heavier use of screens predicted 
later depression, and depression symptoms also 
Photo Yeon Li on Unsplash
88
World Happiness Report 2026
Together, these studies suggest 
that while reverse pathways are 
sometimes found, the forward 
relationship from social media use 
to depressive symptoms is robust, 
particularly for adolescents.
predicted greater subsequent use.94 Together, 
these studies suggest that while reverse pathways 
are sometimes found, the forward relationship 
from social media use to depressive symptoms is 
robust, particularly for adolescents.
However, some researchers claim that the literature 
shows that poor mental health at Time 1 predicts 
later social media use, but not the other way 
around. For example, psychologist Candice 
Odgers wrote in Nature:
When associations over time are found, 
they suggest not that social-media use 
predicts or causes depression, but that 
young people who already have mental- 
health problems use such platforms more 
often or in different ways from their 
healthy peers.95 
But the three studies Odgers cited do not in fact 
support her “reverse predictability only” claim.96
In sum, most of the recent high-quality longitudinal 
studies indicate that heavier social media use at 
one moment in time predicts later depression, 
especially for adolescent girls.97
Evidence Line Six:  
Randomised controlled trials  
of time reduction 
We now turn to the major body of experimental 
research: social media time reduction experiments. 
These experiments randomly assign a portion of 
the participants to reduce or abstain from social 
media for a set period of time and then measure 
changes in their mental health outcomes, compared 
to a control group that made no change.98 
The pattern of results is surprisingly consistent: 
sustained reduction in time on social media tends 
to improve mental health, particularly depression. 
As with correlational studies, disputes in the  
f
ield often arise from how data are analysed  
and, especially, from the problem of blending 
together heterogeneous interventions, outcomes, 
and populations. Likewise, effects that appear 
small on a statistical scale can translate into 
meaningful improvements when considered 
across large populations.
 
Exhibit L:  
Experiments show that social media 
reduction leads to reduced depression
Among the most rigorous meta-analyses to date, 
researchers synthesised 32 randomised controlled 
trials of social media reduction experiments 
(5,544 participants, 91 effect sizes).99 The analysis 
found that restricting social media produced 
consistent improvements in mental health and 
wellbeing outcomes, with pooled significant 
effects of:100
•  Depression: Hedges’ g = 0.19  
(roughly 19% of one standard deviation)101
•  Anxiety: Hedges’ g = 0.28
•  Wellbeing: Hedges’ g = 0.22
In fact, among the 16 experiments that provided a 
clear measure of depression, 14 found reductions 
in depression, and among the 10 that offered a 
clear measure of anxiety, 8 found reductions.102 
One especially important study103 examined the 
effects of social media reduction among already 
distressed young people – a group of particular 
clinical concern. The researchers recruited 220 
distressed US youth, ages 17–25, and randomly 
assigned them to either (a) reduce social media 
use to one hour per day for three weeks, or (b) 
continue their usual use. Compared to the control 
group, those who reduced their use showed 
significant decreases in depression, anxiety, and 
fear of missing out (FOMO), along with improved 
sleep. These benefits were observed for both men 
and women.
89
World Happiness Report 2026
Exhibit M:  
Studies that report no improvement from  
social media reduction actually do reveal  
benefits to depression when unblended
The first widely discussed meta-analysis of social 
media reduction experiments was conducted  
by psychologist Chris Ferguson, who analysed  
27 studies and reported an average effect size of 
d = 0.088 with a confidence interval that included 
zero (–0.018, 0.197). He concluded that these 
f
indings “undermine causal claims […] that  
reductions in social media time would improve 
adolescent mental health” (p. 205). However,  
this conclusion rests on major conceptual and 
methodological flaws.104 Most notably, the  
analysis pooled together highly heterogeneous 
studies that varied widely in duration, design,  
and outcomes. The analysis also included several 
studies that did not examine reductions in social 
media use, and thus cannot be used to assess  
the effects of social media reduction.
By blending highly heterogeneous studies and 
outcomes, Ferguson’s analysis obscured how 
short-term abstinence experiments (one or two 
days) often induce withdrawal-like responses 
(e.g., irritability, craving, and worse mood), 
whereas longer reductions (a week or more) 
usually improve mental health. Reanalysing 
Ferguson’s dataset, researchers found that 
interventions lasting under one week worsened 
mental health (d = –0.175), while those lasting 
longer than one week improved it (d = 0.156).105 
Additionally, when the studies that included 
clinical outcomes like anxiety and depression 
were isolated from studies that used broad, 
blended, composite wellbeing measures, effects 
were substantially larger: a study found d = 0.22 
(using Ferguson’s own dataset) for experiments 
measuring symptoms of internalising disorders,106 
and another study reported (as noted above) 
robust pooled improvements (anxiety: g = 0.28; 
depression: g = 0.19).107
Taken together, these analyses show that when 
studies are unblended and properly analysed, 
they confirm that a sustained reduction in social 
media use (a week or longer) does in fact  
improve adolescent mental health – especially  
for anxiety and depression.
 Exhibit N:  
Meta’s own RCT shows that social media reduction 
leads to multiple mental health benefits
In November 2025, documents obtained via 
discovery in a lawsuit brought by US school 
districts against Meta and other platforms revealed 
that Meta had run its own reduction experiment  
in 2020, with Nielsen (the media measurement 
company).108 The project, code-named Project 
Mercury, asked a randomly selected group of 
users to deactivate their Facebook accounts for 
one week. According to Meta’s own summary, 
“people who stopped using Facebook for a week 
reported lower feelings of depression, anxiety, 
loneliness, and social comparison.”
An internal researcher noted, “the Nielsen study 
does show causal impact on social comparison”, 
adding an unhappy-face emoji. Another staffer 
reportedly warned that burying such results 
would put the company in the same position  
as the tobacco industry “doing research and 
knowing cigs were bad and then keeping that  
info to themselves.”
Internal documents show that Meta subsequently 
called off further work and dismissed the findings 
as being “tainted” by the “existing media narrative” 
around the company. Yet the core fact is that 
Meta’s own experiment found that sustained 
abstention from their product led to improvements 
in user mental health.109 
Evidence Line Seven:  
Natural experiments
One type of study rarely addressed in the debate 
over social media and mental health is the natural 
experiment, which is a research design that 
attempts to estimate causal effects without true 
random assignment. 
 Exhibit O:  
The evidence from natural experiments  
points to harm
The most common natural experiments examine 
the rollout of high-speed internet during the late 
2000s and early 2010s. These studies leverage 
variation in broadband expansion to estimate its 
90
World Happiness Report 2026
All four studies reach a similar 
conclusion: the spread of high
speed internet and social media 
platforms worsened mental 
health. The harms were most  
pronounced among young people 
and disproportionately affected 
women and adolescent girls.
causal impact on mental health in the newly 
connected region. This approach provides  
population-level insights that are not possible in 
short-term lab experiments. These studies rely  
on the assumption that the rollout of high-speed 
internet greatly increased access and time  
spent on social media platforms (which seems 
reasonable given that it was very slow to load 
photos and videos before high-speed internet).
Researchers110 have examined four such studies in 
Germany,111 Italy,112 Spain,113 and the US.114 Across 
diverse contexts and datasets, including national 
health surveys, hospital admission records, and 
suicide statistics, all four studies reach a similar 
conclusion: the spread of high-speed internet and 
social media platforms worsened mental health. 
The harms were most pronounced among young 
people and disproportionately affected women 
and adolescent girls. Documented outcomes 
include declines in self-reported mental health in 
Germany, increases in hospital-diagnosed mental 
disorders in Italy, rising adolescent mental health 
diagnoses (especially among girls) in Spain, and 
higher suicide rates in the US, as well as increased 
depression symptoms among US college students. 
Similar conclusions were drawn in another recent 
review of these studies.115 
Three further studies augment this body of 
evidence. The first found negative effects of the 
arrival of high-speed internet in England on 
adolescent wellbeing.116 These effects were 
strongest among heavy users (>5 hours per day) 
and were associated with social networking site 
use in particular. The second found similar results 
looking at suicidal conduct among teens from 2009 
to 2019 in the wake of broadband introduction  
in the US.117 The impacts of broadband were 
associated with cyberbullying and body  
dissatisfaction for girls, and with decreases in 
sleep for boys. The third exploited a difference- 
in-differences design based on Facebook’s staged 
rollout to US colleges and universities between 
2004 and 2006.118 They found that whenever 
Facebook arrived on campus, symptoms of 
mental illness soon increased.119 Chapter 8 in  
this report also estimates that increased internet 
use reduced wellbeing on average in over 30 
European countries from 2016–2024, with strong 
negative effects among Gen Z but near-zero or 
positive effects for older adults. 
We have only found one study that points in the 
opposite direction.120 It found improved aggre
gate wellbeing, reduction in suicides, and im
proved physical and mental health from broad
band expansion in the US from 2000–2008.121 The 
authors themselves interpret these gains as 
stemming mainly from improved local economic 
conditions (lower unemployment, reduced  
poverty, more business activity) rather than from 
changes in internet or social media use itself.
Summary of the evidence on  
the product safety question
We have now presented 15 exhibits organised 
into seven separate and independent lines of 
evidence. First, we presented three lines of 
“testimony” from the groups that had the clearest 
view of the effects of social media: Gen Z (Line 
One); parents, teachers, school administrators 
and clinicians (Line Two); and employees and 
consultants working for the major social media 
platforms (Line Three).
Next, we presented four lines of academic  
research showing that heavy users of social 
media suffer from substantially elevated risks of 
depression (Line Four); social media use at Time 1 
predicts depression at Time 2 (Line Five); reducing 
time on social media causes improvements to 
mental health (Line Six); and, when high-speed 
internet entered into communities and regions, 
mental health outcomes got worse soon afterward, 
especially for girls and women (Line Seven). 
91
World Happiness Report 2026
These findings converge on the conclusion that 
when adolescents use social media for several 
hours every day, it causes their mental health to 
suffer (on average).
What do you think, readers? Is social media 
probably safe for children and teens, or probably 
not? Do you think that more research is needed 
before we can answer that question?
Of course, it is important to hear the arguments 
on the other side. You should hear from researchers 
who take a more positive view of social media,  
or who take issue with our work. We urge you to 
read the main essay cited by journalists as a 
rebuttal of our work – Candice Odgers’ review in 
Nature.122 We also recommend reading a new 
evidence review led by Amy Orben.123 But after 
presenting our seven lines of evidence, including 
RCTs, natural experiments, and many quotes from 
social media employees stating directly that their 
products are causing harm to adolescents at a 
massive scale, we believe that the preponderance 
of the evidence points to a clear answer to the 
product safety question: no, social media platforms 
are not safe for children and adolescents.
Now let us turn, at last, to the historical trends 
question.
Harm to millions is change at  
the population level
As we noted in the introduction, the product safety 
question is easier to answer than the historical 
trends question, which we formulated like this: 
“Was the spread of social media in the early 2010s 
(as smartphones were widely adopted) a major 
contributing cause of the big increases in adoles
cent depression, anxiety, and self-harm that 
began in many Western countries soon afterward?” 
While our seven lines of evidence do not prove 
that social media was a major cause of those 
population-level changes, which are still with  
us today, they make it much more plausible.  
Conversely, had the preponderance of the evidence 
shown that social media was safe for adolescents 
at the individual level, that would have made it 
less plausible that social media caused those big 
increases at the population level. 
In this section, we present an estimate of the 
scale of direct harm, as well as an estimate of the 
scope of harm to mental health based purely on 
the size of the effect in the social media reduction 
experiments. For illustration purposes, we  
calculate the damage to adolescents in the  
United States, which, in 2023, had a population  
of approximately 43 million young people within 
the US Census age band of 10 to 19. If we assume 
that 90% of them use at least one social media 
platform,124 that gives us about 39 million teens.125 
How many of those 39 million may have been 
harmed by social media usage in ways that might 
have affected their mental health?
Direct harms to millions
Addiction and problematic use: Rates of addiction 
and problematic use often fall around 10%.126 
Facebook itself determined that 12.5% of its users 
were engaging in compulsive use of social media 
that affected their sleep, work, parenting, or 
relationships, and they found that teens have 
even less self-control than adults.127 So, if we 
assume that 10% of all adolescents suffer from 
problematic use of at least one platform, that 
gives us just under four million in the US alone.
Sleep deprivation: According to Pew’s 2025 
Teens, Social Media, and Mental Health report,128 
45% of US teens (17.5 million) report that social 
media hurts the amount of sleep that they get. 
Given the widely acknowledged harmful effects 
of sleep deprivation on mental illness, this effect 
alone could account for substantial changes at 
the population level.
Sextortion: Snapchat was getting 10,000 reports 
of sextortion from its own users each month in 
2022, which would be 120,000 cases per year.129 
One employee noted that this was likely just the 
“tip of the iceberg”, meaning that most cases 
were not reported. Sextortion happens on many 
other platforms too, so the total number of 
victims per year could be well over a million.130
Sexual harassment: Meta whistleblower Arturo 
Béjar conducted a global study while working for 
Instagram.131 He found that 13% of Instagram 
users, ages 13 to 15, self-reported having received 
unwanted sexual advances via the platform within 
92
World Happiness Report 2026
Photo Houcine Ncib on Unsplash
the previous seven days. If the US is on par with 
this global average, 13% of 39 million is 5.7 million 
adolescents in any given week. Béjar explained 
that if “looked at over time, it is likely the largest- 
scale sexual harassment of teens to have ever 
happened, and one that clearly calls for action.”132 
We could go on. We could bring in the millions of 
teens cyberbullied each year,133 and the millions  
of vulnerable teens who are fed self-harm content 
by the platforms’ algorithms every week.134 We 
could quantify the number of additional drug 
overdose deaths caused by the easy access to 
drugs on social media platforms.135
Our point is that the direct harms from social 
media are not just occasional events or freak  
accidents that are happening to a few hundred 
adolescents each year. It would be bad policy to 
remove consumer products from the market 
every time one child finds an unusual way to get 
hurt by it. But there are so many different kinds  
of harm happening to adolescents who use social 
media for several hours every day that the  
number of victims likely exceeds ten million each 
year in the United States alone. This estimate is 
consistent with the Pew finding that 25% of girls 
(and 14% of boys) in the US believe that social 
media is harming their mental health.136
Given the scale of these harms, we believe it is 
plausible and likely that the introduction of 
smartphones with chronically available social 
media caused a substantial portion of the  
decrease in adolescent mental health and  
wellbeing that has been documented in the 
English-speaking countries and Western Europe 
(see Chapter 2 of this report), and more broadly 
across the Western world in other datasets.137
93
World Happiness Report 2026
Indirect harms to millions
Shifting to social media’s indirect harms, we  
can use the effect sizes from the social media 
reduction experiments (Evidence Line Six) to 
estimate how a widespread reduction in social 
media use would affect a population’s wellbeing 
and mental health.
As noted in Exhibit L, research has reported  
an average effect of roughly g = 0.22 (about 
one-fifth of a standard deviation) for “wellbeing” 
outcomes in sustained social media reduction 
studies.138 The “wellbeing” outcome is often 
measured by the Warwick–Edinburgh Mental 
Wellbeing Scale (WEMWBS), which is normally 
distributed in national samples with a mean near 
51 and a standard deviation near seven. On this 
scale, scores below 41 have been used as an 
indicator of probable clinical depression.139
Using these parameters, we can estimate that a 
plausible population impact of social media 
reduction for just two weeks by young adults 
If carried out at scale, we  
predict that the widespread  
reduction of social media use  
by adolescents would cause  
substantial improvements in  
population-level measures of 
wellbeing and mental health.
would be a decline in the prevalence of clinical 
depression by roughly one-third, and a plausible 
impact of a consequent return to regular social 
media use would be the rise in the prevalence of 
clinical depression by one-half (see the online 
appendix for details).
As a point of comparison, others estimate  
that the increased risk of depression and  
anxiety attributable to childhood maltreatment 
corresponds to effects of d = 0.22 and d = 0.25, 
Photo Dipqi Ghozali on Unsplash
94
World Happiness Report 2026
respectively.140 The fact that something as simple 
as a week or two of social media reduction 
produces improvements of a similar magnitude 
suggests to us that the relevant effect sizes are 
not “too small” to warrant policy change. 
If carried out at scale, we predict that the  
widespread reduction of social media use  
by adolescents would cause substantial  
improvements in population-level measures  
of wellbeing and mental health.141 
Group-level effects make population  
effects even larger
The cross-sectional, longitudinal, and experimental 
lines of evidence that we reviewed all examine 
the effects of social media and its associations 
with mental illness at the individual level, usually 
by measuring or manipulating the number of 
hours per day that each individual spends on 
social media. But when social media reconfigured 
teen social networks in the early 2010s, it had 
large group-level or emergent effects. Time spent 
with friends decreased rapidly, well before  
COVID-19,142 and when teens are spending less 
time together then eye contact, physical touch, 
food-sharing, and other ancient human bonding 
mechanisms become rarer too, even for the 
minority who did not open accounts. Teens just 
aren’t hanging out in person as much.
Once nearly everyone was on these platforms, 
everyone was stuck in a collective action trap. 
Even if the platforms were harming 100% of  
the adolescents who used them, any individual  
who quit might find herself even worse off  
because she would lose her online connections 
and might have difficulty finding ways to  
replace them offline.
Once nearly everyone was  
on these platforms, everyone  
was stuck in a collective action 
trap… any individual who quit 
might find herself even worse  
off because she would lose her  
online connections.
The 2023 study led by Leonardo Bursztyn that we 
discussed in Exhibit A gives us a vivid illustration 
of the collective-action trap.143 College students 
said they’d have to be paid to quit social media, 
as individuals. But when the researchers asked 
them their price for quitting if most other  
students were also quitting, the students said 
they’d be willing to pay the researchers to make 
that happen. 
These group-level effects change so many  
aspects of daily social interaction, for so many  
adolescents, that they could turn out to be much 
larger than the individual-level effects found in 
studies that ask individuals to decrease social 
media usage for one week. See Chapter 6 of this 
report for a more detailed discussion.
Sensitive period effects make population  
effects even larger
A key theme of The Anxious Generation was that 
puberty is a sensitive period during which habits 
of attention, emotion, and social interaction will 
guide the rapidly changing brain in ways that 
could yield permanent effects. Neurons that fire 
together, wire together, and this is especially true 
during the years of heightened neural plasticity 
known as puberty. 
One study specifically examined whether the 
associations of social media use and poor mental 
health varied by age. Researchers144 found that 
there did seem to be sensitive periods – age 
ranges within which hours-per-day measures 
showed higher correlations with measures of  
poor mental health. For girls, that period was 
ages 11 to 13. For boys, who hit puberty a bit later, 
it was ages 14 to 15. This is a good reason for 
nations to set minimum ages for opening social 
media accounts no lower than 16.
If radical changes in social and cognitive  
environments during puberty can lead to large 
and possibly lasting changes to an adolescent’s 
brain and personality, then any effect sizes 
computed from brief reduction experiments using 
college students could be vast underestimates  
of the harms caused by heavy social media use 
over several years during puberty.
95
World Happiness Report 2026
Conclusion
The academic debate over whether social media 
is harming adolescents has been complicated  
by the occasional confusion of two different 
questions: the product safety question and  
the historical trends question. Social media 
executives have deflected questions about 
product safety by asserting there is insufficient 
evidence to answer the historical trends question 
with certainty.145 But as we have shown, there is 
now plenty of evidence to answer the product 
safety question. The preponderance of the 
evidence points to this conclusion: social media is 
not safe for adolescents. The seven independent 
lines of evidence we presented show, collectively, 
that the major social media platforms (such as 
Instagram, Snapchat, and TikTok) are causing 
substantial harm to the mental health of  
adolescents, especially girls.
Admittedly, it is more difficult to prove causality 
for historical population-level changes in  
adolescent mental health trends. However, while 
answering the product safety question, we have 
shown that the scale of harm from the ordinary 
use of these dangerous consumer products is  
so great, and affects such a large percentage of 
their users, that it justifies as highly plausible  
the following answer to the historical trends 
question: the sudden introduction of always- 
available social media, made possible by the 
spread of smartphones in the early 2010s, was a 
substantial contributor to the sharp increases in 
mental illness observed in many Western nations, 
and beyond, in the 2010s.146
Academic debates over media effects often take 
decades to resolve. We expect that this one will 
continue for many years. But parents and policy
makers cannot wait for resolution; they must 
make decisions now, based on the preponderance 
of the evidence. 
We believe that the evidence is now sufficient  
to justify the sort of action that the Australian 
government took in 2025 when it raised the age 
for opening or maintaining a social media account 
to 16. Just as the recent international trend of 
removing smartphones from schools is beginning 
to produce educational benefits,147 the research 
We believe that the  
preponderance of the  
evidence points to a clear  
answer to the product safety 
question: no, social media  
platforms are not safe for  
children and adolescents.
we have reviewed suggests that removing social 
media from early adolescence is likely to produce 
mental health benefits.
Countries around the world ran a giant  
uncontrolled experiment on their own children  
in the 2010s by giving them smartphones and 
social media accounts. The available evidence 
suggests that the experiment has harmed them.  
It is time to call it off.
96
World Happiness Report 2026
Endnotes
1  
Rothwell (2023). Note that Snapchat was not included in 
the survey options.
2 Sawyer et al. (2018); Twenge (2025).
3 World Health Organization (n.d.). 
4 Steinberg (1985).
5 Haidt (2024).
6 See Evidence Line Three later in this essay.
7  We note that there are additional indirect harms, such as 
stunted social development, interference with cognitive 
development, and declining educational outcomes that fall 
beyond the scope of this essay. See Nagata et al. (2025). 
and Nguyen et al. (2025). 
8  See Blanchflower et al. (2024); McGorry et al. (2024); 
Rausch and Haidt (2023a); Rausch and Haidt (2023b); 
Schrijvers et al. (2024); Twenge et al. (2021).
9  See Table A1.2 in Marquez et al. (2024). See Chapter 3 
Appendix in Helliwell et al. (2024). We note there is 
variation by sex. For boys, there were 33 statistically  
significant decreases, 13 statistically insignificant  
outcomes, and 1 statistically significant increase  
(Republic of Korea). For girls, there were 41 statistically 
significant decreases, 5 statistically insignificant  
outcomes, and 1 statistically significant increase (Greece).
10 Twenge et al. (2021).
11  
The difference between these two questions is important 
because they are often conflated. In his 2024 Senate 
testimony, Mark Zuckerberg told the US Senate that a 
report from the National Academies of Sciences “did not 
support the conclusion that social media causes changes 
in adolescent mental health at the population level.” That 
statement pertains to whether current evidence can 
explain historical shifts in aggregate rates (the historical 
trends question). This conclusion does not speak to 
whether present-day use of specific platforms elevates risk 
for individual teens (the product safety question). Indeed, 
that same report includes a long chapter (Chapter Four) 
documenting a variety of harms at the individual level. In 
other words: it is possible to conclude that “social media  
is unsafe for young people” even when the causes of past 
population trends remain uncertain.
12  People’s beliefs about causation may not be reliable for 
cancer or other diseases that don’t become visible for 
many years after the events that caused them. People 
have much better insight into the foods that cause their 
allergic reactions. Social media is much more like allergies 
than like cancer in this regard. Like food allergies, some 
effects of social media show up within minutes, and people 
have many chances to observe the dose-response effect of 
their time on social media. This is why we consider these 
testimonials to be evidence of causation.
13 Fridman (2022); Odgers (2024).
14  We note that parents and legislators often use an even 
lower standard of proof: the precautionary principle,  
which says that when there is credible evidence that harm 
is possible, preventive action should be taken, especially 
when the costs of such action are low.
15  See Haidt and Rausch (2025c) on the Consensus Study, 
which found strong agreement among a large group of 
experts that 25 out of 26 claims drawn from The Anxious 
Generation were “probably true”.
16  Our most vocal critic is Candice Odgers. See her main 
essay: Odgers (2024). Or see Schiffer (2024) for an essay 
that interviews several critics.
17  Pew says that Gen Z begins with the birth year 1997. 
Twenge (2017) said that “iGen” began with the birth year 
1995. In The Anxious Generation, we split the difference 
and considered that 1996 was the first year. Of course the 
change in generations did not happen in a single year, but 
the mid to late 1990s seems to be the span of time in 
which it happened.
18 Faverio et al. (2025).
19 Faverio and Sidoti (2024).
20  The survey does not provide gender breakdowns for the 
experience of benefits. For teens in general, 4% report that 
social media improves their sleep, 19% report it improves 
their confidence, and 10% report it improves their mental 
health. Faverio et al. (2025).
21 Haidt and Johnson (2024).
22  Gen Z men and women showed similar amounts of regret 
across platforms, besides TikTok. Men were significantly 
more likely to wish that TikTok was never invented  
(55% to 39%). See Skiera (2024).
23 Bursztyn et al. (2023).
24 More in Common (2025).
25  The British Standards Institution (2025). This study found 
that, “half (47%) of young people aged 16 to 21 would prefer 
to be young in a world without the internet, with 50% also 
saying a social media curfew would improve their lives.” 
26 headspace and Brunton (2018).
27  We have been looking for writings by members of Gen Z 
that defend social media, or that claim that it has been 
good for their generation. Such writings are hard to find, 
while it is very easy to find essays by members of Gen Z 
that blame social media for personal or generational harm.
28  See also Coe et al. (2023) McKinsey Health Institute’s 2022 
Global Gen Z Survey of 42,000 people across 26 countries, 
although the key question about social media was actually 
about “technology and social media” so the regret 
numbers are lower, but they are consistently highest for 
Gen Z.
29 Wells et al. (2021).
30 Meta (2021).
31 Wells et al. (2021). 
97
World Happiness Report 2026
32  Appearance-Based Social Comparison Study, December 
2020, available at MetasInternalResearch.org.
33 Béjar (2024).
34  State of New Mexico ex rel. Torrez v. Meta Platforms, Inc. 
(2024). 
35 Haidt and Rausch (2025a); Haidt and Rausch (2025b).
36 Faverio et al. (2025).
37  The Harris Poll (2025). Also see Haidt et al. (2025) for a 
summary of findings.
38  See country specific surveys in France (Fondation pour 
l’Enfance, 2024), Germany (Bitkom, 2025; Woessman et 
al., 2025), Netherlands (ANP, 2025), and Japan (Bay, 2017). 
39 Ipsos Education Monitor (2025).
40 NBC New York Staff (2024). 
41 National Education Association (2024). 
42 Hatfield (2024).
43 Prothero and Harwin (2024).
44 UWE Bristol Media Relations Team (2025).
45 Fundación MAPFRE (2025).
46 Fondation pour l’Enfance (2025).
47  European School Education Platform Editorial team 
(2025).
48  Each had at least two years of experience post licensure 
and provided care for at least 30 patients in the past  
30 months. 
49  Although Evidence Line Three focused on three major 
companies (TikTok, Snap, and Meta), they are not the only 
digital platforms at which the leadership is aware that their 
products pose significant risk of harm to minors. For  
example, a 2016 internal presentation from the YouTube 
Main App Team stated that they “aspire[d] to create an 
app that is […] addictive.” Another presentation revealed 
their goal to “increase habitual users” and “focus on 
making YouTube a daily habit.” (In Re Social Media 
Addiction Litig., 2024). Likewise, in litigation involving 
Roblox, one employee acknowledged: You’re supposed  
to make sure that your users are safe but the downside  
to that, if you’re limiting user engagement, it’s hurting 
our metrics. It’s hurting our active users, the time spent 
on the platform, and in a lot of cases leadership doesn’t 
want that. (See p. 31, paragraph 90 in Jane Doe v. Roblox 
Corp., 2025).
50  We compiled the quotes and statistics in open-source 
Google Docs and translated them into essays published  
on After Babel. See Haidt et al. (n.d.); Haidt and Rausch 
(2025a); Haidt and Rausch (2025b). 
51 The Wall Street Journal (n.d.); Reuters (n.d.).
52 Haidt and Rausch (2025a).
53 Link NKY (2024); State of Nebraska v. TikTok Inc. (2024).
54  See p. 82, paragraph 213 in Commonwealth of Kentucky v. 
TikTok Inc. (2024).
55  See p. 10, paragraph 19 in Commonwealth of Kentucky v. 
TikTok Inc. (2024). 
56  See p. 82, paragraph 216 in Commonwealth of Kentucky v. 
TikTok Inc. (2024). 
57 Haidt and Rausch (2025a).
58 Haidt and Rausch (2025b).
59 State of New Mexico v. Snap Inc. (2024).
60 FBI Memphis (2024).
61  See pp. 59-60, paragraphs 132-134 in State of New Mexico 
v. Snap Inc. (2024).
62  See p. 54, paragraph 117 in State of New Mexico v.  
Snap Inc. (2024).
63  See p. 126, paragraph 317 in State of New Mexico v.  
Snap Inc. (2024).
64  See p. 100, paragraph 242 in State of New Mexico v.  
Snap Inc. (2024). 
65 The Wall Street Journal (2021).
66  Written Testimony of Arturo Béjar before the  
Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology, and the  
Law (2023).
67  State of New Mexico v. Meta Platforms, Inc. Doc. 36–1, 
(2024); In Re Social Media Addiction Litig. (2024).
68  See p. 148, paragraph 296 in State of New Mexico v.  
Meta Platforms, Inc., Doc 36–1 (2024).
69  See p. 151, paragraph 306 in State of New Mexico v.  
Meta Platforms, Inc., Doc 36–1 (2024). 
70 See p. 27 in In Re Social Media Addiction Litig. (2024).
71 See p. 33 in In Re Social Media Addiction Litig. (2024).
72 E.g., Bowles (2018).
73 Liu et al. (2022); Orben (2020).
74 Orben and Przybylski (2019).
75 Kelly et al. (2019). 
76 Grund (2025); Twenge et al. (2022). 
77 Liu et al. (2022). 
78 Rothwell (2023).
79 See the online appendix for conversions from OR to RR. 
80 Greb and Rausch (2025).
81  Relative risks (RRs) were calculated as simple proportion 
ratios using depression prevalence data from Tables 1  
and 2 of Kelly et al. (2019). Each RR represents the 
prevalence of depression in the exposed group divided  
by the prevalence in the reference group, comparing: 
social media use >5hours/day vs. <1hour/day; <7 hours  
of sleep vs. >7 hours of sleep; cyberbullying victims vs.  
not involved; and lowest economic quintile vs. highest 
economic quintile. Values >1.0 indicate increased  
depression risk.
82  Murthy (2024); U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office of the Surgeon General (2023). 
83 Riehm et al. (2019).
98
World Happiness Report 2026
84 Hancock et al. (2022).
85  Committee on the Impact of Social Media on Adolescent 
Health, Board on Population Health and Public Health 
Practice (2024).
86  Also note that the study does not provide separate results 
for girls and boys, even though sex and gender-based 
factors play a widely known role in mental health risks.
87 Orben and Przybylski (2019).
88  Twenge et al. (2022). For more details, see Underestimating 
digital media harm. Here, ‘wellbeing’ included outcomes 
such as “Restless, overactive, cannot stay still for long”; 
“Shares readily with other children (treats, toys, pencils, 
etc.)”; and “Generally obedient, usually does what adults 
request.” The ‘wellbeing’ measure was overwhelmed with 
outcomes unrelated to internalising symptoms. When 
Twenge et al. (2022) reanalysed the same dataset and 
code, restricting outcomes to internalising symptoms and 
focusing on girls’ social media use, the associations 
increased dramatically: median standardised betas were 
roughly –0.20 for girls (most between –0.25 and –0.15), 
compared to –0.04 for boys. 
89  For a much deeper analysis of “blending” and related 
problems in the cross-sectional studies, see Haidt and 
Rausch (2026).
90 McClean and Lebwohl (2025). 
91 Riehm et al. (2019).
92 Nagata et al. (2025).
93 Grund and Luciana (2025).
94 Vasconcellos et al. (2025).
95 Odgers (2024).
96  McLean and Lebwohl (2025). The three studies cited by 
Odgers as showing only reverse prediction do not actually 
show it: (1) Puukko et al. (2020) did not measure time 
spent on social media, focusing instead on more positive 
forms of digital communication including emailing and 
direct messaging on WhatsApp. (2) Hancock et al. (2022) 
blended social media with other screen use, they mixed 
age groups and outcomes, and they still found no evidence 
for reverse predictability (the distress  social media path 
was zero). (3) Heffer et al. (2019) offers a case for reverse 
predictability – but only for girls, and even that study also 
found evidence for the forward direction. In other words,  
it suggests a reciprocal relationship, which still implies that 
social media use at Time 1 contributes to harm at Time 2.
97  A new longitudinal study was published when this report 
was in its final editing stage. Cheng et al. (2025) did not 
f
ind that social media use at Time 1 predicted later 
internalising symptoms among boys and girls. We have 
requested access to data and code, but have been told it 
will take several months until they are publicly available. 
98  This work faces both conceptual and empirical challenges 
including issues of compliance (how many really reduced 
their use?), short intervention windows (reduction for one 
day versus multiple weeks), individuals reducing use while 
all of their peers remain online, misinterpretation of 
withdrawal effects, and varying definitions of “reduction”.
99 Burnell et al. (2025).
100  These values are from “Table 2. Social media restriction 
effects by individual outcome, problematic cases removed.”
101  Hedges’ g is a version of Cohen’s d that includes a 
small-sample correction. In practice, they are interpreted 
the same – for example, g = 0.20 is roughly equivalent to  
d = 0.20. The values we give here are from their analyses 
that exclude problematic studies. The corresponding rates 
for the full dataset (including all studies) was g = 0.22  
(for depression) and g = 0.17 (for anxiety). 
102 See online appendix for details.
103 Davis and Goldfield (2025).
104 Rausch and Haidt (2025).
105 Thrul et al. (2025).
106 Stein (2024).
107  Similarly, another recent meta-analysis by Lemahieu et al. 
(2025) reported no significant effects of social media 
abstinence on affective wellbeing or life satisfaction.  
This study focused narrowly on short-term abstinence 
interventions (most lasting about a week or less) and  
on mood-related outcomes such as positive affect and 
negative affect. They also included life satisfaction.  
In other words, the authors did not examine clinical 
outcomes like anxiety and depression, nor did they include 
longer-term reduction studies. Their null findings are 
therefore exactly what we would expect: when the analysis 
is limited to short-term abstinence studies that measure 
immediate mood states, there is little benefit to be 
expected. As other research on behavioral addictions 
shows, withdrawal from an addictive or habit-forming 
behaviour can temporarily worsen mood before longer- 
term benefits emerge (Lembke, 2021).
108 Horwitz (2025).
109  Meta Internal Research (n.d.). We create a website that 
describes more than 20 other internal studies that Meta 
conducted, nearly all documenting various risks to young 
users via platform design. To learn more about Project 
Mercury, see metasinternalresearch.org.
110 McClean et al. (2025).
111 
Golin (2022).
112 Donati et al. (2022).
113 Arenas-Arroyo et al. (2022).
114 Kyung et al. (2021).
115 Pugno (2025).
116 McDool et al. (2020).
117 Churchill and Johnson (2026). 
118 Braghieri et al. (2022).
99
World Happiness Report 2026
119  Although most of these natural experiments offer  
compelling evidence of population-level harm, they are not 
without limitations. First, most studies examine broadband 
internet access rather than social media use specifically. 
Meanwhile, the only study that examined a social media 
platform directly – Braghieri et al. (2022) – focused on 
Facebook’s rollout in 2004–2006, when the platform was 
text-based, desktop-only, and limited to college students. 
This environment differed substantially from today’s 
modern social media environment.
120 Johnson and Persico (2025).
121 Johnson and Persico (2025).
122  Others include Lebedikova et al. (2024), and Brown 
(2024).
123 Orben et al. (2025).
124 Pew Research Center (2025).
125  We previously estimated the number of US teen users 
(ages 13 to 17) of TikTok and Snapchat. We estimated that 
in 2023 about 13.7 million teens in the US used TikTok, and 
about 12.7 million of these teens were daily users of TikTok. 
Additionally, we estimated that between 2019 and 2023, 
there were about 13 to 15 million US teens (ages 13 to 17) 
on Snapchat. We estimated that as of 2021, there were 
nearly 3 million 8 to 12-year-olds in the US on Snapchat. 
See Haidt et al. (2025a) for our TikTok estimates and Haidt 
et al. (2025b) for our Snapchat estimates.
126 Boer et al. (2020).
127 Wells et al. (2021).
128 Faverio et al. (2025).
129 Haidt and Rausch (2025a).
130 Beauchere (2023).
131 Béjar (2024).
132  Written Testimony of Arturo Béjar before the Subcommittee 
on Privacy, Technology, and the Law (2023).
133  Meta Internal Research (2025). Bad Experiences and 
Encounters Framework (BEEF) Survey (2021). This survey 
found that 10.8% of Instagram users aged 13-15 reported 
being a target of bullying in the last week. Also see 
Anderson (2018) where 59% of US teens report having 
been cyberbullied. 
134  Meta Internal Research (2025). Bad Experiences and 
Encounters Framework (BEEF) Survey (2021). This survey 
found that 8.4% of Instagram users aged 13–15 reported 
seeing someone harm themselves or threaten to harm 
themselves in the last week alone.
135 Bergman (2026); Gerber (2025). 
136 Faverio et al. (2025).
137  See Schrijvers et al., (2024) on Europe; Twenge et al., 
(2021), which uses PISA internationally; Rausch and Haidt 
(2023a) on the Anglosphere; and Rausch and Haidt 
(2023b) on the Nordic Countries. 
138 Burnell et al. (2025).
139 University of Warwick (2025).