How does social media affect teenagers?
What can you do to help?
Study tips
Published 13 Feb, 2026  ·  9-minute read
With Australia’s world-first ban on social media for children under 16 now in place, there’s a question many teens and their parents are grappling with: how does social media affect teenagers? And what can they do to reduce the risks?

For most parents, the idea of growing up surrounded by social media is uncharted territory. But clearly this virtual world of feeds, influencers and endless scrolling can have very real impacts on today’s teenagers.

As Associate Professor Garth Stahl from UQ’s School of Education puts it, young people are “growing up in what’s essentially a gladiatorial colosseum of likes, views, and algorithms”. This can make the teenage years – when social pressures are already heightened – even more complex and confusing.

We spoke with Garth and other UQ experts in psychology, biostatistics, parenting and digital cultures to find out what kind of effect social media can have on teenagers, what parents should be concerned about, and what they can do to help keep their children safe, especially after they turn 16.

The answer is nuanced. Social media can offer connection, belonging, and opportunities for learning. But it also carries measurable risks to teenagers’ mental and physical health. The key is understanding how, when and why teens use social media – not just how often.

What risks does social media pose to teens’ mental health?
Research from Associate Professor in Biostatistics Asaduzzaman Khan shows that as screen time increases, mental wellbeing tends to decline, with young people reporting lower life satisfaction.

“The strongest risks tend to cluster around high discretionary screen use and emotionally charged platform features (endless scrolling, likes),” says Asad.

“These can intensify worry, low mood, and stress, especially when exposure exceeds a few hours daily.”

Importantly, simply restricting screen time may not be the solution. A single hour of social media can be detrimental to one teen, while several hours for another might have a neutral effect – it all depends on what they’re viewing and how they’re engaging with it.

“What really matters is how teens use screens, the content they see, and whether screen use crowds out sleep, physical activity, or offline relationships.”

Teen boy using social media in bedroom
Signs your teen may be struggling with social media use
Asad says these are some of the key signals parents should look out for:

mood changes
irritability
withdrawal
sleep problems
feeling distressed after being online.
Of course, many of these behaviours can occur naturally during adolescence – with or without social media. What matters is whether they appear alongside increased screen use or feel unusually intense or persistent.

Associate Professor Michael Noetel from UQ’s School of Psychology has reached similar conclusions in his research.

“We found social media showed consistent associations with harm and no clear benefits,” he says.

“Social media is linked to small but real effects on depression, risky behaviour, and body image problems.”

Mike’s research has revealed the primary risks of social media for teens include:

cyberbullying
exposure to harmful content
social comparison.
“Teenagers see curated highlight reels of other people's lives and feel worse about their own. They may also feel pressure to be constantly available or fear missing out.”

Professor Alina Morawska, Director of UQ’s Parenting and Family Support Centre, sees similar patterns in her work with families. For her, it’s clear that both the frequency and specific nature of a child’s social media use can play a role in determining how harmful it can be.

“Available evidence suggests that excessive or problematic use of social media can have adverse mental health outcomes,” she says.

“These include anxiety and depression, as well as sleep disorders, lower subjective wellbeing, and self-injurious thoughts and behaviours.”

A teen girl feeling lonely on social media while her friends chat in real life
Some other ways social media’s impact can manifest in teens include low self-esteem, envy, and loneliness.

If your teen is struggling with depression and/or anxiety, explore some of these mental health resources for parents.

Is social media 'addiction' the problem?
The evidence hasn't quite settled on whether social media can be 'addictive' in a scientific sense. However, Professor Nicholas Carah, Director of UQ's Centre for Digital Cultures and Societies, understands why the term pops up so often.

"Social media uses algorithmic recommendation to keep users scrolling for as long as possible," he says.

"I think that's why we call it addictive in an everyday sense."

For Nic, the real concern is how the algorithm taps into users' vulnerabilities with what seems to be a compulsive, obsessive and uncanny logic.

"It tunes into what we display interest in and then zooms in on that," he says.

"This can be a problem when it starts to recommend content or target advertising that is harmful to our wellbeing and flourishing."

This danger becomes more tangible when the algorithm starts to target users with content and advertising related to harmful or addictive commodities, such as:

alcohol
gambling
fast food
crypto
vaping.
Nic believes that looking at social media 'addiction' and solutions from a person-by-person perspective is only one step towards a solution – and not necessarily the most important step.

"It's not enough to just think about individuals who might be addicted, or strategies to manage our own individual use of social media," he says.

"Rather, we need to tackle these larger social issues too, which go to the heart of the problem: the hyper-commercialised attention economy that social media platforms have built and must be held accountable for."

You may be surprised by how aware teens themselves are of this issue, as well as how proactive they can be in challenging it.

"It's interesting how many young people articulate all of this on their own terms," says Nic.

"Just as much as they talk about 'being addicted' to social media, they also express desires to 'switch off' the algorithm."

As an example, Nic points to the popularity of the Fix Our Feeds campaign organised by Teach Us Consent, which pushes for an 'opt-out' feature for algorithmic recommendations on social media.

"I think we should listen to young people who are asking for these big changes to the social media platforms themselves."

How does social media influence a teen’s self-identify and sense of belonging?
Young people’s identities have always been shaped by their environments: home, school, friend groups, sports teams, and local communities. For teens today, social media is an extra digital ecosystem that can influence them – for better or for worse.

“Social media has become an important platform for young people to engage with each other,” says Alina.

“So, like any other social context where a teen spends a lot of time, this can influence their sense of belonging and identity.”

Garth recognises that social media is now a major site of social validation.

“It shapes how people see themselves and, for teenagers, this does pose risks,” he says.

“The problem isn’t just connection versus isolation – it’s constant exposure to persuasive, idealised content in a money-driven attention economy designed to keep us all looking, comparing, and scrolling.”

For parents, this means the social world their teen inhabits isn’t neutral — it’s shaped by commercial incentives.

Asad acknowledges that social media can be a powerful space for teens to find belonging – it can help them maintain friendships, find communities, and express their creativity. But he notes that social media is, more often than not, a less-than-ideal environment for this compared to real-life settings.

“Online interactions can affirm self-concept, but they may also intensify pressure to present an idealised self,” he says.

“This matters because identity formation is closely linked to acceptance and perceived social status, and algorithmic amplification can overemphasise appearance, popularity metrics, and extreme content, distorting perceptions of what is normal or valued.”

Teen girl overwhelmed by social media reactions
Why are teens particularly vulnerable to the effects of social media?
Asad explains that adolescence is a delicate developmental period, and social media only heightens the unique pressures that teens face. Suddenly their insecurities and fears are being reflected – and often exaggerated – back at them via constant, public and numerical feedback (likes, views, comments, notifications).

“This developmental window can amplify emotional reactions to exclusion, criticism, or appearance-based comparison,” says Asad.

“During adolescence, the parts of the brain that support self-control and emotion regulation are still developing, while systems linked to reward and social sensitivity are especially active.”

“This makes teens more responsive to novelty and peer feedback. Social media platforms are built around these same features – likes, notifications, and rapid feedback – which can encourage frequent checking and intensify reactions to online approval or criticism.”

Mike agrees that adolescence is a sensitive period of identity formation, adding that teens care deeply about what their peers think (even when they act like they don’t), and that feedback from social media can often be harsh and public. A cruel comment online doesn’t feel like a private jab between friends – it feels like a takedown in front of the whole school.

Alina points out that this period of rapid social, academic and physical development can also push teens towards risk-taking behaviours online – whatever they think will help them impress or fit in with their friends. That might mean posting risky content, engaging in online conflicts, or participating in trends without fully considering the consequences.

Teen boy taking risks to get a reaction on social media
Which teens are most vulnerable?
The teens most at risk of being negatively affected by social media are those facing other problems or obstacles in their lives. Alina says existing data is mostly correlational, so we can’t make solid conclusions yet, but certain adolescents are likely to be more vulnerable. These may include:

teens with a history of trauma or abuse
teens with limited support
teens from minority groups.
Mike’s research supports this theory.

“We found that children who are already struggling emotionally are more likely to turn to screens as a coping mechanism,” he says.

“So, the most vulnerable teens may be those who are already anxious, lonely, or socially isolated.”

“It creates a vicious cycle: screens can cause problems, but kids with problems also turn to screens to cope.”

Asad adds a few other factors that can make teens more susceptible to the harms of social media: poor sleep, being bullied, and late-night scrolling. But he’s also quick to mention that context is key here.

“Teens who feel isolated or discriminated against may turn to online spaces for connections,” he says.

“This can help, but it can also harm, depending on the content and community.”

Beyond mental health: how does social media affect teens physically?
Asad’s research shows that the effects of social media can extend beyond mental health. Screen use can displace sleep, reduce physical activity and increase sedentary behaviour – particularly when it continues into the evening.

“Australian research shows many teens aren’t getting the recommended 8–10 hours of sleep, with screens, stress, and routines playing a big role,” he says.

“Too much screen use can also mean less sport and outdoor play, which is why the scientific community recommends limiting recreational screen use and keeping devices out of bedrooms overnight.

“Diet can be affected too, as more scrolling often goes hand in hand with mindless snacking, exposure to food advertising, and less time for regular meals.”

“In our research, higher screen time is linked to poorer wellbeing, while physical activity consistently supports mental health. When scrolling replaces movement and sleep, teens can experience downstream effects on mood regulation, energy, attention, and healthy routines.”

Teen boy snacking while doomscrolling
What about the positive effects of social media for teenagers?
Our academics agree that social media can be a force for good in some circumstances. However, they caution that the potential benefits do not automatically outweigh the risks, particularly during adolescence.

Garth knows that social media can be a powerful learning space for teens, especially if their school feels out of touch with the issues they care about.

“Many young people use it to educate themselves, engage in activism, and find communities they can’t access offline,” he says.

“For marginalised teens, online spaces can be a sanctuary.”

“That said, the benefits don’t cancel out the risks. It’s like riding a bike: we know it’s risky, but we manage that risk rather than pretending the bumps in the road don't exist.”

Mike has a similar analogy.

“Drinking in the pub is another way to ‘stay connected’ and ‘find belonging’, but the risks of doing so outweigh the benefits for adolescents,” he says.

He also points out that some of social media’s benefits can be replicated elsewhere, such as making video calls with family to maintain emotional connections or playing videos games online with friends when face-to-face time isn’t possible.

“It’s not that all teenagers would be harmed, just like not all people drinking in the pub are harmed,” he says.

“For a teenager who maintains close real-world relationships and uses social media in moderation, the benefits for them might outweigh the risks. But the harm to most adolescents seems to be high enough that it doesn’t offset the benefits to those who get them.”

What can teens and their parents do to maintain a healthy relationship with social media?
Now, the question remains: what can you do to help your child navigate the world of social media safely? Because turning 16 won’t magically make them immune to the dangers we’ve discussed here.

In fact, Alina emphasises that teaching teens about social media early will be vital in light of the ban, so they know what to expect before they’re allowed to join in.

“The key is starting before access begins, to assist young people to be educated about how to use social media in a way that is purposeful, considered and balanced,” she says.

Garth agrees – going from no knowledge of social media at 15 to full access at 16 would be a recipe for disaster.

“What we really need to do is build digital resilience and digital literacy – helping young people develop scepticism and boundaries to navigate this system that was never designed with their wellbeing in mind.”

Mother and daughter using social media together
Mike believes parents should still set some expectations and boundaries for social media use once their children turn 16.

“Decide on screen-free times (like meals and before bed) and screen-free zones (like bedrooms) – consider keeping devices charging outside the bedroom at night,” he says.

He also recommends having connected conversations with your teen, rather than trying to implement lots of hard rules that will be tough to enforce.

“Talk openly and take interest in the online part of their life too,” says Mike.

“It might be hard to stay non-judgemental – you may have to stop your eyes rolling at some of the things your kids like – but we’re trying to make ourselves someone they can come to if something upsets them.”

Asad feels the next step is moving past strict screen limits and focusing on healthy use patterns. He suggests these evidence-based strategies:

Protect sleep (no phones in bed, create a consistent wind-down evening routine).
Switch off non-essential notifications.
Curate feeds by muting or unfollowing accounts that trigger comparison or distress.
Use privacy and safety settings to reduce unwanted contact.
Encourage active, purposeful use (messaging, creating, learning) rather than endless, passive scrolling.
Regularly check in about how different platforms are making your teen feel.
“Maintaining a healthy screen-activity balance is key,” he says.

“Prioritise sport, outdoor activities and offline social routines over recreational scrolling.”

What do teens think?
Nic believes it's essential to involve teenagers in the broader conversation about social media.

"We should spend more time asking young people what they want social media to be like, and then thinking seriously about how we can help them articulate their visions," he says.

"Social media is really important to young people – it's the infrastructure of their social life, just like the park, the mall and the telephone were for earlier generations."

"So, it's also on us to make social media safe for young people. That will take collective effort, but we have to be up for it."

External support and practical tips
Mike and Asad both emphasise reaching out for external support when needed.

“Normalise help-seeking,” says Asad.

“If sleep, mood, school engagement or relationships begin to decline, consider a planned break from social media and seek support from a GP or youth services like headspace.”

Mike adds that these warning signs, if severe, can also signal that they need more support, such as a psychologist.

“Screens are not likely to be the whole problem, so it’s better to get them support they need than to, for example, just take away their phone,” he says.

Remember, you’re not alone in this. Mike recommends checking out programs like Triple P (Positive Parenting Program, developed at UQ), which can help your family navigate these challenges.

Beyond rules and limits, experts emphasise connection and modelling. Other practical tips for parents include:

Work together with your child to set expectations. Asad says, “Agreed-upon limits and boundaries are most effective when young people feel heard and involved.”
Check in with your child if they’re using social media more often than usual. Mike says, “Heavy screen us might be their way of saying ‘I’m struggling’.”
Try to remain open, calm and honest when talking to your child about their social media use. Alina says, “Being an askable parent, where adolescents feel they can come to their parents for support when they encounter problems, is important.”
Teach your child about protecting their wellbeing online. Asad says, “Support teens to recognise cyberbullying, block or report harmful content, and understand how to report serious online abuse through eSafety.”
Don’t always treat screens as the enemy – they can also provide a good chance to bond. Mike says, “Watch something together, ask questions about the games they play… these conversations build trust and help you understand their online world.”
Be a role model in how you use social media yourself. Alina says, “Parents can demonstrate how they are using social media in a way that is intentional, responsible, and limited. For example, parents can talk to their adolescents about what they are using social media for and how. They can also discuss problematic content that they have come across and show their child how they have responded to it.”
A group of teenage friends using social media while hanging out
Final thoughts
If your teen is having mental health problems, keep in mind that social media is rarely the only or leading cause – it’s often a two-way street that we need to look at more holistically.

“Our research shows screens and emotional problems work both ways,” says Mike.

“If we take screens away without addressing why kids turn to them, we haven’t solved the problem – and some kids use screens to cope with anxiety or loneliness.”

“Ultimately, the question shouldn’t be ‘screens or no screens?’. It should be ‘what are screens replacing?’. If screen time is crowding out sleep, exercise, learning and face-to-face friendships, that’s a problem.”

And while it might be tempting to impose the ban on your teen even after they turn 16, Asad’s findings suggest that complete exclusion from social media isn’t a realistic option for older teens. Rather, it should be viewed as a necessary tool (and, yes, sometimes a necessary evil) to support peer connection and friendship coordination.

The overall aim should be for social media to be one aspect of their balanced daily routine.

“The goal is to support identity and belonging with safeguards – healthier feeds, kinder communities, and strong offline anchors such as sport, clubs, and family connection.”